s, where an imposing and numerous tribunal assembled to
judge him. Many of its members were for a mild punishment, some for none
at all; others remained silent; one only opined for the death of the
accused. But Charles had determined on his young rival’s destruction; he
threw his word and influence into the scale, and sentence of
decapitation was pronounced on Conradin of Swabia, Frederick of Baden,
known as Duke of Austria, and the barons taken in their company. The two
princes had not expected such severity, and were playing at chess in
their prison when it was announced to them. They piously confessed, were
absolved by the Pope, who relented at this extreme moment, and were led
to the scaffold, which was covered with a red cloth in honour of the
victims’ royal blood. The executioner was there, with naked arms and
feet, and axe in hand. Conradin embraced him, having previously done the
same by his friend Frederick and the other sufferers—then laid his head
upon the block. When the axe rose, the French chevaliers who stood
around the scaffold fell upon their knees and prayed; and as they did
so, the head of Conradin rolled upon the crimson cloth. At this sight
the Duke of Austria started up as if crazed with despair; he was seized
and executed, uttering horrible cries. This butchery at last roused the
indignation of the French knights. Robert de Béthune threw himself upon
the prothonotary, who had read Conradin’s sentence, and with a blow of
his sword cast him down half dead from his platform. This strange and
unreasonable act, proceeding from a generous but savage impulse, was
greatly applauded by the spectators. Even Charles himself was compelled
to feign approval of his son-in-law’s violence.

No funeral honours were paid to Conradin and his companions. They were
buried secretly in the sand, on the shore of the sea, at the mouth of
the river Sebeto. Of their captivity, judgment, and death, M. de St
Priest declares himself to have given, with the fidelity of a
conscientious historian, an exact and truthful account. At the same
time, he subjoins various details that have obtained more or less
credence, but which he treats as fables. It has been said, that when
Conradin embarked at Astura, he gave a ring in payment of his passage;
that the boatmen who received the jewel took it to Frangipani, and that
the fugitive was recognised and arrested upon this romantic indication.
According to traditions, the Duke of Austria was executed the first, and
Conradin kissed his head, which, all severed and bleeding as it was,
still invoked the Holy Virgin. Robert de Béthune killed, it has been
affirmed, the prothonotary Robert de Bari, whose signature is found,
however, in many subsequent acts. And to crown all these marvels, it has
been confidently asserted that, after the execution of the two princes,
a masked stranger stabbed the headsman. Very recent and trustworthy
writers have recorded as fact, that Conradin, just before receiving the
fatal blow, threw a glove amongst the crowd, to be taken to Peter of
Arragon, to whom he bequeathed his vengeance and crown. A German
chevalier, Truchsess de Waldburg, (M. de St Priest calls him Waldburg de
Truchsess,) gathered up the gage, and with much risk and difficulty bore
it to its destination. The present historian discredits the whole of
this glove-story—a fiction, he says, of the invention of Sylvius
Piccolomini. He is more unwilling to doubt the following touching
tradition:—“One day the inhabitants of Naples beheld in their bay a
vessel of strange form and colour; hull, sails, and rigging were all
black. A woman in deep sables left the ship,—it was Queen
Elizabeth-Margaret, Conradin’s mother. At the rumour of her son’s
captivity she embarked all her treasures, and, gaining intrepidity from
her maternal love, this Elizabeth, previously so feeble and fearful that
she dared not leave her castles in Swabia and the Tyrol, exposed herself
to the perils of the sea, as bearer of her child’s ransom. But it was
too late. When she reached Naples, Conradin was dead. Then the unhappy
mother implored a single favour: she desired to erect a monument to him
she wept, on the spot where he had perished. Charles would not consent,
although he authorised the erection of a church upon the place of
execution, and contributed a considerable sum towards the work,—an
expiatory offering which, in conjunction with the useless ransom,
attested at once the grief of an inconsolable mother, and the tardy
remorse of a pitiless victor.” The church is to be seen at Naples, upon
the square of Santa Maria del Carmine; beneath its altar is the tomb,
with its inscription; the statue of Elizabeth stands there with a purse
in its hand. Surely this is confirmation strong of the truth of the
tradition! Unfortunately, church, inscription, and statue are all of a
recent date.

The events just detailed left Charles of Anjou at the pinnacle of power
and greatness. The magnitude of the danger he had run added to the
lustre of his triumph. Nothing now resisted him; he might almost be
styled the master of Italy. Every where the Guelfs drove the Ghibellines
before them; every where the Swabian eagle fled before the red and
silver lilies. The cause of the Ghibellines was lost. The fortunate
conqueror was on every point successful. His domestic prosperity kept
pace with his political and military success. Charles, then forty-two
years old, beheld himself surrounded by a numerous posterity. He had two
sons and three daughters. His queen, Beatrix of Provence, was dead; but
soon he contracted a second marriage with the young and beautiful
Margaret of Burgundy. Nature herself seemed to favour him; for in the
short space of three years, all his enemies, in any way formidable,
disappeared from the scene. Amongst others, the valiant and adventurous
Corrado Capece, taken prisoner by the implacable Guillaume de
l’Estendard, had his eyes put out, and was hung upon a gibbet of
extraordinary altitude, erected for the purpose upon the coast of
Catania. The Saracens of Lucera still held out. Besieged by a powerful
army, with Charles at its head, they resisted for six months, till
reduced to eat hay and roots. The bodies of stragglers from the town
being opened by the besiegers, only grass was found in their bellies. At
last they gave in. Charles, with a wise policy, showed them mercy,
contenting himself with banishing them from Lucera, and distributing
them amongst the towns of the interior. Although the piety of the first
French king of Sicily was carried almost to an exaggerated extent, it
did not degenerate into fanaticism; at least not into that fanaticism
which engenders persecution. He never adopted the prejudices of the time
against the Jews; on the contrary, he delivered them from the hands of
state inquisitors, and suppressed the distinctive mark they were
compelled to wear upon their garments. Financial considerations may not
improbably have stimulated, at least as much as the dictates of reason
and humanity, this enlightened spirit of tolerance; but still it is to
the credit of Charles that he did not, like many very Christian kings
and nobles of his and subsequent centuries, smite the Israelite with one
hand whilst stripping him with the other. The King of Jerusalem was
merciful to his subjects. Charles it was who first added this title to
that of King of Sicily, by purchase from the old Princess Mary of
Antioch, who called herself Mademoiselle de Jerusalem, and claimed that
crown, then little more than a name. When Charles, for a pension of four
thousand _livres tournois_, acquired her rights, he hastened to
vindicate them. They were disputed by Henry, King of Cyprus, who had the
advantage of possession; for he held Ptolemais, the last fragment of the
christian kingdom of Palestine. The Knights of St John supported him;
Venice and the Templars backed King Charles. The latter carried the day.

Master of southern Italy, armed protector of the north, Charles I. had
no longer aught to check him; the East was open before him. Already he
occupied a part of Greece. All that mountainous coast of Albania,
celebrated in our days for the devotedness of the Suliots, belonged to
him by the death of Helena Comnenus, Mainfroy’s widow, daughter of the
despot of Thessaly and Epirus. He also held the island of Corfu, that
natural bridge thrown between Italy and the East. The town of Durazzo
revolted in his favour, and called him within its walls. He swayed
Achaia and the Morea, and had constituted himself candidate for the
throne of Constantinople by marrying his daughter to Philip de
Courtenay, nominal heir to the Latin Empire, but living in reality on
the alms of his father-in-law. It seemed, then, that he had nothing to
do but to bid his fleet sail for Byzantium. But in the midst of his
ambitious projects he was interrupted by the new crusade, the last
undertaken, got up by Saint Louis, and in which Charles could not refuse
to join. The death of St Louis terminated the expedition; and after
dictating terms of peace to the sultan of Tunis, in whose dominions the
adventurers had landed, their return to Europe, by way of Sicily, was
decided upon. It was not consistent with Charles’s character to forget
or abandon an enterprise he had once decided upon; and on landing at
Trapani, he assembled the council of crusading kings and princes, and
proposed to them to re-embark for Constantinople. It was a bold and
sagacious idea to take advantage of this unusual assemblage of naval
forces to establish French power in the East; but Charles, indefatigable
himself, spoke to disheartened and disgusted men. All refused, and
Edward Plantagenet (afterwards Edward I. of England) rejected with
insulting energy his uncle’s proposition, declaring that he would winter
in Sicily, and afterwards return to Syria, which he did, without other
result than the wound cured by the well-known trait of conjugal
affection and courage of the virtuous and intrepid Eleanor of Castile.
Subsequently, the realisation of Charles’s ambitious designs upon the
East, long entertained, was continually prevented by one circumstance or
another, until at last the affairs of Sicily gave him occupation at
home, effectually precluding aggrandisement abroad. Essentially a man of
war, he nevertheless, in time of peace, showed skill, intelligence, and
activity in the administration of the kingdom of Naples. Had the distant
provinces of his dominions been as well governed, M. de St Priest
affirms that the Two Sicilies would not, during more than two centuries,
have been sundered and at enmity. But Charles abandoned the island
Sicily to his lieutenants. He positively disliked and ill-treated it,
and determined to dispossess Palermo of its title of capital, in favour
of the city of Naples, of which he was enthusiastically fond. Palermo
was too devoted to the house of Swabia; and, moreover, to maintain
correspondence with the north of Italy, with Rome, and especially with
France, it suited Charles far better to fix his headquarters and seat of
government at Naples. From the very first moment, he had been greatly
struck by the aspect of the latter city. The bright sky and sunny sea
and mountain amphitheatre that still charm and fascinate the tourist,
had a far stronger effect upon the prince whom conquest rendered their
master. He at once mentally fixed upon Naples as his capital, and
gradually accomplished his project—without, however, announcing it by
public declaration, and even continuing to give to Palermo the titles
establishing its supremacy. But, whilst retaining the empty name of
superiority, the Sicilian city felt itself substantially fallen; and
this may have been a cause, and no slight one, that its inhabitants were
the first to rise in arms against the galling yoke and insolent neglect
of their French rulers.

M. de St Priest’s third volume brings Charles to the zenith of his
fortunes. Invested for life with the high dignity of sole Roman senator,
he had the full support and hearty alliance of Martin IV.—a French pope,
whose election had been compelled from the conclave by the intimidation
of the sword. It was the first time since Charles had entered Italy that
the pontifical chair had been occupied by a man on whose docility he
could entirely reckon. Papal mistrust and jealousy had been the bane of
many of his projects. All apprehensions from that quarter were now
removed, and, strong in this holy alliance, he again prepared for his
eastern expedition. All was ready; at the head of five thousand men,
without counting infantry, and of a hundred and thirty ships, he had
only to give the order to steer for the Bosphorus. But in Sicily, the
storm, long brewing, was on the eve of bursting forth; and the powerful
armament intended for distant conquest, was found insufficient to retain
present possessions. The decline of Charles’s life was also that of his
power: his last days were days of heaviness, disaster, and grief.




                        TRAVELLING IN TAFFYLAND.


People wander into Wales principally in search of health and amusement;
a few for business; many without any purpose whatever, except the desire
of changing place and doing something. Any one who finds himself in
either of these classes need not fear being disappointed in the results
of his visit; for there is motion and change enough throughout the
country; sufficient business to make it worth the while of those who
know how to buy and sell; amusement for all who are worth amusing, and
health enough for all the world. Let no man, however, deceive himself
with the vain expectation that he shall have no ups and downs in his
pilgrimage through the country; let no one suppose that it is perpetual
sunshine there; nor let any one fondly think that, because he does
himself the honour of whipping a stream with fly and line, therefore, at
every throw a sixpound trout is sure to swallow his bait. Far otherwise.
The tourist in Wales must not be a man of many expectations, and then he
will not be disappointed; he must be content to go many a weary mile to
see some choice bit of scenery, and then to come as many or more miles
home again; he must make up his mind to have plenty of rain, wind and
cold, in the hottest day in summer; and he may cast his fly all the way
up from Conwy to Penmachno without having “one single glorious rise.” In
fact, he must be a patient reasonable man, and then he may adventure
himself in Taffyland without fear.

But if he is an acute observer of nature—if he loves to see t