th traitors abroad, to raise a rebellion in favour of the
Pretender.”

A few days before, a proclamation had appeared, offering a reward of
£500 for the apprehension of one Weston, formerly clerk to Gray’s Inn
Chapel. Warrants were immediately issued for the apprehension of many
other persons, of whom the principal was Atterbury, the Bishop of
Rochester, who was arrested at his deanery in Westminster, carried
before the Council, and committed to the Tower.

Shortly after, Lords North and Grey were arrested in the Isle of Wight;
and about the same time the principal agent, one Layer, a barrister, was
also seized. North was committed to the Tower, where, on his lady’s
desiring admission to him, and being refused, he exhibited a specimen of
that pleasantry which seems to have belonged to the name. Opening his
window, “Madam,” said he, “this is a _convent_ for men, and not for your
sex.”

Layer’s trial soon followed. The evidence proved that he had been
engaged in a plan for a general insurrection, for the overthrow of the
established government, and for bringing in the Chevalier. The king, the
prince, and the ministers, were to be seized, the Tower was to be taken,
and the army was to be bought over. The correspondence on this subject
had been seized at Layer’s chambers, in Southampton Buildings, and was
in his handwriting.

An instance of what may be regarded as the etiquette of English law, was
given on his trial. The prisoner had been carried to the court at
Westminster in fetters, of which he complained to the Chief Justice as
an insult. To this it was replied, that he had made an attempt to
escape; on which the judge said, that the use of the fetters was
justifiable. But, on his being brought into court, his counsel applied
to have the fetters taken off; to which the judge replied, “The irons
_must_ be taken off: we shall not stir until the irons are taken off.”

The Solicitor General spoke with great effect in reply to the prisoner’s
counsel, and Layer was found guilty. He was several times reprieved, in
the hope of obtaining evidence sufficient to implicate persons of higher
rank, who were strongly suspected, Layer being evidently but an agent.
However, he was at length executed.

A bill of pains and penalties was then brought in against the Bishop of
Rochester. Among the witnesses in his favour was the celebrated
Alexander Pope, who came forward to depose to the Bishop’s domestic
habits and studies. But it was remarked, that his performance on this
occasion only showed that his abilities were not formed for exhibition
in a court of justice. He made but an indifferent figure as a witness:
he had but little to say, and that little he blundered.

Atterbury himself, however, made a better display. It having been
insinuated that Sir Robert Walpole had tampered with the Bishop’s
witnesses, for the purpose of involving other persons of condition,
Walpole appeared in person to disavow the charge. Atterbury fastened on
him, and exerted all his dexterity to make him contradict himself. “A
greater trial of skill,” observed Speaker Onslow, “than this scarcely
ever happened between two such combatants,—the one fighting for his
reputation, the other for his acquittal.” The bill of pains and
penalties was brought in by eighty-seven peers to forty-three. Atterbury
was banished; and the following paragraph in one of the journals gives
the account of his departure:—

“June 19, 1723.—Yesterday, between twelve and one, the deprived Bishop
of Rochester set out from the Tower in the navy barge, and was delivered
up to Captain Laurence, commander of the Aldborough man-of-war, lying in
Long Reach. Two footmen in purple liveries attended him, himself being
in a lay habit of gray cloth. Great numbers of people went to see him
take water, many of whom accompanied him down the river in barges and
boats. We hear that two messengers went on board the man-of-war, to see
him set on shore at Ostend, whence, it is said, he will proceed to
Aix-la-Chapelle, after staying some time at Brussels.”

The Bishop, however, was set on shore at Calais, from the violence of
the weather, which made the passage to Ostend dangerous; and on being
told at landing, that Bolingbroke had received the king’s pardon, and
had arrived at the same place on his return to England, he pleasantly
said, “Then I am _exchanged_.” Pope observed that “the nation was afraid
of being overrun with too much politeness, and could not gain one great
genius, but at the expense of another.”

That Bolingbroke was a man of remarkable talent, must be believed from
the evidence of his public career. But the fame of Atterbury seems to
have had no firmer foundations than his being the intimate of Pope, and
a Jacobite. He had the scholarship of an academic, but he gave no
exhibition of ability in public life. His sermons are extant, and are
trifling. As a Jacobite, he must have been incapable of comprehending
the value of liberty, regardless of Protestantism, and faithless to his
king. His mitre alone probably saved him from a severer punishment than
exile. But the simple fact that a Protestant bishop conspired to bring
back a dynasty pledged to Popery, and notorious for persecution, is
enough to consign his memory to historic shame.

Another curious instance, involving a bishop, occurred about this
period. Wilson, the Bishop of Sodor and Man, in consequence of his
refusal of the holy sacrament to the wife of the governor of the island,
was thrown by him into prison, and fined. The bishop appealed to the
Privy Council, by whom he was released, on the opinion of the Attorney
and Solicitor Generals, and the fine was remitted. The Earl of Derby,
the “sovereign” of the island, contended that it was a “free nation.”
But he was not able to show that its freedom implied the power of
controlling the spiritual functions of the bishop.

On this subject, however, it must be acknowledged that the right of
refusing the sacrament to individuals who might be disapproved of by the
clergy, was obviously dangerous, and, though retained in words, is
justly abandoned in practice by the Establishment. Such a practice would
imply that the clergyman could penetrate the secrets of the heart: it
would also give a most offensive power of public insult, a strong
temptation to private revenge, and might inflict an irreparable injury
on personal character, without any public trial, or any means of
personal defence. It is also observable, that no man _can_ ascertain how
suddenly and effectually conversion may change the whole tenor of the
mind; while the mere fact of coming to the communion-table naturally
implies a returning sense of duty. Some of the half Popish
disciplinarians of our day, who talk much more of the church than they
think of Christianity, have attempted to renew this harsh and hazardous
practice. But the man of sense will avoid the insult; and the Christian
will acknowledge that, if rebuke is to be administered at all, it ought
to be in the shape of private exhortation, and not in the arbitrary and
exasperating form of public shame.

The most painful part in the office of Attorney General is the duty of
prosecuting high criminals. The Earl of Macclesfield now put this duty
to the test. A charge was laid against the Chancellor for corruption in
the sale of masterships in Chancery, and the embezzlement of the
suitors’ money in their hands. He was impeached by the Commons, and
tried by the Lords, was found guilty, and fined £30,000. But on the
questions being put that he should be rendered incapable of serving the
king, or sitting in parliament, both were negatived; but, for the honour
of parliament, the one only by forty-two to forty-two, the Speaker
giving, of course, the vote in his favour; and the latter by forty-five
to thirty-nine. The trial lasted twenty days, and naturally excited
great attention. The ground of his escape from official ruin, (for
nothing could save him from public shame,) was probably his favouritism
at St James’s—a favouritism which, unluckily for the honour of the
courtiers, seems to have remained undiminished.

The conduct of the Attorney General has been censured, as ungrateful to
his early patron; but the censure is unfounded. He did all that he
could: he refused to join in the prosecution, and avoided this duty with
some difficulty. The Earl’s guilt was notorious; nothing could save him.
It was no part of the Attorney General’s virtues to thwart public
justice, nor was it in his power. He simply consulted the delicacy of
old friendship, by refusing to urge its progress. It has been even
asked, Why did he not _resign_? Such is the absurdity of querists. His
resignation could not have saved the Chancellor, who, after all, escaped
with the easy sacrifice of a comparatively small sum from a purse
believed to be plethoric with the public money.

Yorke still continued to advance in reputation and office. The deaths of
the Chancellor and the Chief Justice were followed by the appointment of
Talbot to the woolsack, and of Yorke to the Chief Justiceship, with an
increase of the salary from £2000 to £4000 a-year, and the peerage, by
the title of Baron Hardwicke, from an estate which he had purchased in
the county of Gloucester.

He was now on the verge of his highest promotion. The Chancellor Talbot
died in February 1736, after five days’ illness, at the age of
fifty-three.

An entry in Lord Hardwicke’s private journal gives a curious and
characteristic account of his promotion. “On Monday the 14th of
February, about five in the morning, died Charles Talbot, Lord High
Chancellor of Great Britain. The _same forenoon_, being at the sittings
in Westminster Hall, I received a letter from Sir Robert Walpole,
desiring to speak with me on the event of that morning, and wishing that
I would dine with him that day in private. I went accordingly, and after
dinner he proposed the Great Seal to me in the king’s name. Thereupon I
took occasion to state to him, that I was now in a quiet situation,
which, by practice, was become easy to me; that I had no _ambition_ to
go higher; and, though I had the most grateful sense of his majesty’s
goodness, desired to be left where I was.”

Sir Robert perfectly understood this “nolo episcopari” style, and
pressed the appointment. We are a little ashamed for the delicacy of the
future Chancellor; for he now told the minister, that the Chief
Clerkship of the King’s Bench being likely to fall soon into his gift,
which he might grant for two lives for the benefit of his family, he
must have an equivalent! After some bargaining, Yorke offered to take
the reversion of the Tellership of the Exchequer for his eldest son.
Walpole objected, that the king “disliked reversions.” And well he
might; for the Tellership of the Exchequer was said to have amounted (in
subsequent times) to £40,000 a-year! The bargain was at length
struck—the Tellership was given, and Hardwicke was Chancellor. A note in
Horace Walpole’s Memoirs adds point to the transaction: it says that
“Walpole, finding it difficult to make Hardwicke give up the Chief
Justiceship, told him that, if he refused, he would give the Seals to
Fazakerly. ‘What!’ exclaimed Hardwicke, ‘Fazakerly! he is a Tory,
perhaps a Jacobite.’ ‘All very true,’ replied Walpole; ‘but if by one
o’clock you do not accept my offer, Fazakerly, _by two_, becomes Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal, and one of _the stanchest Whigs in England_!’”

The Chancellor, as a scholar and a man of the world, was consulted by
his friends on occasional rules of life; and, in answer to a request of
the Marchioness of Annandale to give his opinion on the course of
education proper for her son, Hardwicke, in giving a detail of the