it may be blown into a flame by the sight of so many portly Chief
Justices, and Lord Chief Barons, with an occasional glimpse of a retired
Lord Chancellor, reposing on a sinecure of £5000 a-year.

Another weakness of the biographer is an eloquent effort to _prove_ that
a barrister, whose talents raise him to the summit of his profession, is
but little the worse for the want of a university education. It would
have been quite sufficient to say, that Philip Yorke rose to be the
first lawyer of his age, and Lord Chancellor, without having ever set
foot within the walls of a college.

Yorke, at the commencement of his career, was fortunate in an
introduction through Parker, one of his fellow-students at Salkeld’s, to
Lord Macclesfield, Lord Chief Justice, to whose son it is said that he
was engaged as law-tutor. The Chief Justice received him at his table,
took an evident interest in his progress, and patronised him on every
important occasion. Yorke’s manners were as gentle as his intellect was
acute; and such a man would naturally be received with favour at the
table of a person so high in rank as Lord Macclesfield. But it has never
been said that he humiliated himself for that honour; and through life
he had a quiet way of gaining his point, of which a curious instance was
given in his earliest days.

The wife of Salkeld was a thrifty personage, who, evidently thinking
that her husband’s pupils might be employed in other operations than
scribbling parchments, occasionally sent him on her messages, and even
to execute some of her commissions in Covent Garden Market. Yorke
obeyed, but on giving in the account of his expenditure on those
occasions, there appeared frequent entries of coach hire, for “celery
and turnips from Covent Garden,” a “barrel of oysters from the
fishmonger’s,” &c. &c. Salkeld, perceiving this, remarked to his wife on
the expensive nature of this “saving,” and Yorke was no longer employed
as her conveyancer of celery and turnips.

He had also some pleasantry as well as point, of which an anecdote was
told by the late Jeremy Bentham. Powis, one of the judges of the King’s
Bench, one day at a lawyers’ dinner expressed to Yorke his “surprise” at
his having got into so much business in so short a period. “I conceive,”
said the old fool, “that you must have published some book, or be about
publishing something; for look, d’ye see? (which seems to have been a
favourite phrase of his,) there is scarcely a cause before the court but
you are employed in it.” Yorke answered with a smile, “that he had
indeed some thoughts of publishing, but that he had yet made no progress
in his book. Powis, priding himself on his sagacity, begged to know its
nature. He was answered that it was a “Versification of Coke upon
Littleton.” The judge begged a specimen, on which Yorke recited—

               “He that holdeth his lands in fee
               Need neither to quake nor to shiver,
               I humbly conceive; for _look, do you see_,
               They are his and his heirs for ever.”

It may fairly be presumed that a laugh went round the table; but Powis
was so fully convinced that he had hit upon the true reason, that on
meeting Yorke some months after, he inquired gravely about the progress
of his volume.

However, Powis seems to have been a mark for the wits, as we find by
some lines on the Bench, by the memorable Duke of Wharton:—

           “When Powis sums up a cause without a blunder;
           And honest Price shall trim and truckle under;
           When Eyre his haughtiness shall lay aside,
           And Tracy’s generous soul shall swell with pride,
           Then will I cease my charmer to adore,
           And think of love and politics no more.”

Yorke was now beginning to feel his way in his profession; and if
poverty had been his original stimulus, he had a fair prospect of
exchanging it for wealth. The _dictum_ of Thurlow on this subject is
proverbial. When asked by some friend to advise his son as to “the way
he should go” to rise at the bar, that rough functionary said, “Let him
spend all his fortune—then marry, and spend his wife’s fortune; and then
let him return to his books, and _he may_ have some chance of business.”

But Yorke, without spending either his or his wife’s fortune, had
already taken the first step to official distinction by entering
Parliament, May 2, 1719. He was chosen member for Lewes in Sussex. The
simplicity of this transaction affords a curious contrast to the
performances of the present day. The Duke of Newcastle sent a letter to
the “free and independent electors,” evidently directing them to elect
his friend Mr Yorke. The letter was duly answered by an address from one
hundred and thirty-two electors, in this style:—

“We, whose names are hereunto subscribed, the constables and inhabitants
of the borough of Lewes, having heard your Grace’s letter publicly read,
do not only herein return your Grace our hearty thanks for the _honour_
you have done us in recommending so fit a person as Mr Yorke, to serve
as one of our representatives in parliament for this town, for the
present vacancy, but also beg leave to assure your Grace, that we do
unanimously and entirely approve of him, and shall be ready _on all
occasions_ to show the regard we have to the favour your Grace has
pleased to lay upon us.

                                         “Your Grace’s most obliged and
                                             “Obedient humble servants.”

The orthography of those honest people differs from modern
penmanship,—but the _principle_ of the affair, even in our polished day
of liberalism, probably differs no more than a close borough of the year
1719 differs from an open borough of 1848. The successful barrister, and
promising member of parliament, now made the most important step which
any man can make, and took to himself a wife. It would be unfair to say
that in this instance he was guided by the calculations which are so
often charged upon his profession. But there can be no doubt, that
whatever might be the pleasure of his new connexion, it had all the
merit of prudence. The lady was a widow, young and pretty, and with a
fortune of £6000, which at that time was probably equal to twice the sum
in our day. But probably a charm of no inferior importance was her being
the niece of Sir Joseph Jekyll, Master of the Rolls. The whole
transaction was sufficiently juridical. Sir Joseph had sent a letter
with Yorke, to be presented to Mr Charles Cox, the father of the lady,
who had married Mary, the eldest daughter of Lord Somers. On reading the
letter, the old gentleman desired Yorke to “leave his rental and
writings” with him; and upon Yorke’s acknowledging that he had neither,
Cox expressed his astonishment that his brother-in-law, Sir Joseph,
“should have recommended such a person to him.” On writing to Sir Joseph
on the subject, he received an answer, “not to hesitate a moment in
accepting the offer, for that the gentleman who made it, and was now
content with his daughter’s £6000, would in another year expect _three
or four times the sum with a wife_!” The letter had its effect, and the
marriage took place.

Yorke then took a house in Lincoln’s Inn Fields, and began to go
circuit; there his biographer stoutly and justly defends him against the
imputation of “intriguing for business,” alleged in Lord Campbell’s
“Lives of the Chancellors;” an imputation which has not been sustained
by any part of his subsequent conduct. For, though charged with singular
anxiety to realise a fortune, there is no evidence of any meanness in
its pursuit. And his professional distinction, his natural talent, and
his rank as a member of parliament, (a matter of high consideration in
those days) rendered his possession of business natural and easy.

But he was soon to have official distinction. When going the Western
Circuit, he received a letter from the Lord Chancellor, announcing to
him “his Majesty’s pleasure to select him for Solicitor General;” an
office into which he was sworn in March 1720, at the age of thirty!

Much professional dissatisfaction was exhibited on this promotion of so
young a member of the bar; and for some period the attorneys exhibited
an equal reluctance to employ him in important causes. But, as a leader,
he soon showed qualities which had been partially concealed in his
inferior rank, and reconciled at once the public and the profession to
his precedency. It has been remarked, that some of the most
distinguished judges have _not_ been successful in the lower rank of
their profession, while it has not rarely happened that the most
distinguished advocates have failed as judges. The qualifications for
the bench, and those for the bar, or even for the leadership of the bar,
have considerable differences, and the management of the great
principles of law is evidently a separate task from the dexterity of
detail.

The father of the Solicitor General, who had the happiness to see his
son’s promotion, died in the following year. It appears that Yorke, who
was now Sir Philip, kept up a constant and kind correspondence with his
family, which was, of course, strengthened by his having obtained the
recordership of Dover, an appointment which he valued very highly, and
retained through life.

The volume contains some striking remarks on the often discussed
question—“why lawyers seldom succeed as parliamentary speakers.” And the
reason assigned, and truly assigned, is, that lawyers have something
else to do. The man who is occupied all day in the courts, has no time
for parliamentary subjects. He comes into the House fatigued, and
unsupplied with the detail which is _necessary_ to give effect to any
address in so business-like an assembly. He merely gives an opinion and
sits down. If he attempts more, he generally fails; or his best success
is an escape. Thus the two greatest advocates whom England and Ireland
have ever seen, Erskine and Curran, were ineffective in parliament—the
only distinction being, that Erskine was laughed at, while Curran was
laughed with. With these extraordinary men, who had every quality of the
orator, and whose vigour of argument took the bench by storm, while the
flashes of their imagination threw brilliancy over the dreariest topics,
there could be no conceivable source of failure, except in their want of
preparation for the peculiar objects of debate.

But there is also another, and an obvious consideration. There are but
few orators in the world, and these few are not always either lawyers or
members of parliament. But, when the true orator appears, he is _felt_,
and he would be felt in an assembly of Esquimaux. He requires no
complacency in his audience; he communicates with their spirit, at once.
He touches strings which, however unawakened before, are in every living
bosom; he finds echoes in the heart, which a thousand other voices might
have called on in vain.

At the same time it must be admitted, that the knowledge which law
demands, is of high importance to any success which hopes to be
_permanent_ in the House; that its nature in the questions constantly
coming before an assembly of lawmakers, is indisputable; and that the
perfection of a debater would consist in his possessing the knowledge of
a lawyer, combined with the taste, talent, and expansive views of a
statesman. The lawyers in parliament have always possessed great weight;
and though the instances of their arriving at the Premiership are
_remarkably_ few, (we recollect but one, the late Mr Perceval,) they
have always possessed a large share of parliamentary power.

A case of some peculiarity occurred at this time—it was the proposal to
commute the sentence of death on some criminals, on condition of their
submitting to inoculation for the small-pox. The case was laid before
Raymond and Yorke, the Attorney and Solicitor General; whose answer was
in this form;

“The lives of those persons being in the power of his majesty, he may
grant a pardon to them on such lawful condition as he may think fit.
And, as to this particular condition, we have no objection in point of
law; the rather, because the carrying on this practice to perfection,
may lead to the general benefit of mankind.”

The small-pox was then almost a plague: it assailed all classes; and
some of the royal children, and many of those of the nobility died of
it. Its extraordinary power of disfiguring the features of the su