ion with many other
circumstances, the child’s extraordinary precocity of intelligence and
feeling. Considering his mother as widow of an emperor, although his
father had never legally borne the imperial title, since he had not been
crowned at Rome, Conradin treated her with the utmost ceremony and
observance of etiquette. Suddenly, weary of living in dependence at the
court of her brother, Louis the Severe, Duke of Bavaria, Queen
Elizabeth-Margaret married Meinhard de Gorice, brother of the Count de
Tirol, and from queen became a mere countess.[19] This alliance, unequal
but not low, greatly shocked Conradin: in the words of a chronicler, he
was moved by it beyond power of expression, and from that moment he
abstained from paying his mother the usual honours. She asked him the
reason. “Mother,” replied Conradin, “I rendered you the homage due to an
emperor’s widow; now you are married to one less than him, and I, a king
and an emperor’s son, can no longer render you the honours due to an
empress.” He who spoke this was but seven years old, and hence many
writers have treated the words as fiction. But it must be borne in mind
that from his very cradle he had been nourished with the hopes of his
party, whose pretensions and dreams of triumph had been unceasingly
instilled into him. The talk of all around him had been of sceptres to
reconquer, victories to win, rebels to chastise; and the pathetic but
deceitful picture of an oppressed people, sighing for his return, had
been kept continually before his eyes. Every act of his life was
premature. Brought up in a political hot-bed, he showed early symptoms
of imperfect mental growth, and was crushed and annihilated by the first
storm. Whilst yet a very young child, he was surrounded by the empty
forms of sovereignty, and made to think himself both a man and a king.
His uncle and stepfather dragged him from town to town, dressed in regal
robes, and compelled him to hold provincial diets. Whilst thus parading,
they unscrupulously despoiled him. Before he was ten years old, the Duke
of Bavaria made him sign a will bequeathing to him the whole of his
possessions, in case of his death without heirs. Even this did not
satisfy the greedy Bavarian, who soon afterwards extracted from him, by
manner of donation, some of his richest domains in Rhineland and the
Palatinate. The example found imitators. Princes, bishops, cities, and
abbeys fell tooth and nail upon the heritage of the unfortunate child.
The bishops of Augsburg and Constance, the counts of Wurtemburg, the
burgraves of Nuremberg, the king of Bohemia, and several others, shared
the spoils. The houses of Austria and Prussia date their rise from that
time—the nucleus of the two monarchies was formed by fragments of
Conradin’s dominions; and the whole of Germany as it now appears, in its
kingdoms and divisions, may be traced back to the fragments of this
total wreck and infamous spoliation. Thus plundered, nothing remained
but to start the victim on his travels; a royal Quixote in search of a
crown. At first he showed small disposition to such an adventure, and
more than one deputation of Ghibellines, and even of Guelfs, departed
unsuccessful from before the young king’s footstool; until at last
Gualvano Lancia, Mainfroy’s relative and faithful adherent, and Corrado
and Marino Capece, presented themselves at the gate of the ancient
castle of Hohenschwangau. Lancia had been amnestied after the battle of
Benevento, at the request of the Pope, but much against the will of
Charles of Anjou. He took the oaths to the new king, but soon afterwards
left the kingdom, and now appeared before Conradin as deputy from the
whole body of Ghibellines, which had reconstituted itself throughout the
entire kingdom of the Sicilies, and sent to the grandson of the Emperor
Frederick assurances of its devotion, the promise of an army, and
considerable sums of money. Lancia was the bearer of one hundred
thousand gold florins. Thus was it, says the chronicler, Saba Malaspina,
that the little sleeping dog was roused up: “_ad suscitandum catulum
dormientem_.” In spite of the tears and entreaties of his mother, who
had a foreboding of his fate, and urged him to remain with her, Conradin
published a lengthy manifesto, asserting his rights to the crown of
Sicily, put himself at the head of ten thousand men, hired by Ghibelline
gold, and entered Italy, full of confidence, hope, and enthusiasm,
accompanied by his bosom friend, Frederick, Duke of Austria, son of the
Margrave of Baden, and followed by the Duke of Bavaria, and by other
nobles, who promised him support, but shamefully abandoned him at
Verona, upon the most absurd and frivolous pretexts. The poor boy was
born to be every body’s dupe. He believed implicitly the hypocritical
professions of his treacherous kinsman, made over to him one of the last
shreds of his German possessions, and parted from him with tears in his
eyes, remaining alone at Verona, with Frederick of Austria, who was only
three years his senior, for sole ally—his troops reduced by the
defection of his uncle and the others to about three thousand men.
Instead of marching at once to Pisa, and taking ship for Sicily, whose
inhabitants were ripe for insurrection, he sent Corrado Capece thither,
and himself lingered two months in total inaction. Pisa was devoted to
the house of Swabia; Capece had no difficulty in obtaining a galley
(Conradin would have found a fleet as easily), and after calling at
Tunis for the Spanish Infante Don Fadrique, with four hundred Spaniards
and Saracens, he landed at Sciacca, gained an advantage over the French,
and saw the greater part of Sicily declare for Conradin. After a while,
Conradin, having raised money from the Ghibelline towns, and recruited
his forces, moved forward to Pavia; whilst Charles of Anjou, advancing
northward to meet his rival, entered Pisa sword in hand, upset its
towers and ruined its port. It would lead us too far, and be of no great
interest, to trace the singular complications of Italian affairs at this
moment, and the perplexities of the Pope, who was at least as jealous of
the abode of Charles in Tuscany, as of the feeble attempt of the old
German dynasty to regain its seat upon the Neapolitan throne. We must
confine ourselves to the career of Conradin, and follow his fortunes,
now drawing to a lamentable close. There was a bright flash, however,
before the final setting of his star. He occupied Pisa—still the first
port in Italy—in spite of the devastations of Charles of Anjou; on all
sides the Ghibelline party raised its head, and his enterprise assumed a
serious aspect. Clement IV. became alarmed, and sent, for the third
time, an order to Conradin to lay down his arms, and appear in person
before the pontifical chair to justify his conduct, under pain of all
manner of excommunication. Conradin, who seems to have inherited a
wholesome contempt for the Pope, replied by despatching a fleet of
four-and-twenty Pisan galleys to Sicily. This was another blunder. He
should have gone himself, with all his forces, and certain success
awaited him. Charles of Anjou absent, his troops dispersed and
surprised, Sicily was lost to the French dynasty. But Conradin, like a
child as he was, thought only of a triumphant march on Rome and Naples.
For a paltry pageant, he threw away a kingdom. Whilst his adherents
gained ground in Sicily, Apulia, Calabria, and other provinces, he
nullified their advantages by folly and delay. His only forced marches
were upon the road to ruin. A successful but unimportant ambuscade, in
which fifty of the enemy were cut off, completely turned his head. The
prisoners were conducted in triumph to Sienna; and Conradin and his
army, brimful of confidence, scoffing at pontifical anathemas, and
followed by a crowd of Ghibellines which every hour augmented, marched
upon Rome, taking the longest route by way of Viterbo, in order to show
themselves to Clement IV., then resident in that city. They passed under
its walls, crowned with verdure and flowers, more like bacchanals and
vintagers than men-at-arms. From the window of his palace Clement
witnessed the loose array. “Behold!” said he, “the sheep led to the
slaughter!” The prelates surrounding him remained silent, in respectful
doubt. The pontiff, penetrating their thoughts, persisted in his
assertion. “Truly,” he said, “in eight days nothing will remain of that
army.” His firm voice, his imposing countenance, his fervent piety,
impressed the hearers with a conviction that he spoke prophetically. The
event justified the prediction, the result of political
clear-sightedness rather than of divine inspiration.

Conradin’s reception at Rome completed his intoxication. He was
accompanied into the city by a chorus of young girls, singing and
tambourine-playing in the midst of the soldiers. Magnificently dressed
ladies showed themselves at the windows of the palaces; the people
thronged the streets. Every where he passed under triumphal arches,
hastily raised in his honour. They consisted of cords tied across the
street, and supporting, instead of the usual garlands of laurels and
flowers, the most precious objects the Romans possessed; rich furs and
garments, bucklers, rings, bracelets, arms and jewellery of all kinds.
Amidst public acclamations in honour of his courage and beauty, Conradin
ascended to the Capitol, escorted by the most illustrious Romans of the
Imperial party. What head of sixteen would not have been turned by such
incense! At last he quitted Rome at the head of five thousand German and
Italian men-at-arms, and of nine hundred Spanish cavaliers; surrounded
and pressed on all sides by a clamorous and jubilant multitude. He had
formed a plan which showed resolution and some military skill. Instead
of marching to Ceprano, the usual route of the conquerors of Naples, and
in which direction he was persuaded Charles (then besieging Lucera)
would advance to meet him, he conceived the bold project of turning his
enemy’s flank by penetrating into the Abruzzi, effecting a junction with
the Saracens of Lucera, and thence proceeding to Naples. But Charles was
too old a soldier to be easily outwitted. Advised from Rome of
Conradin’s departure and route, he abruptly raised the siege he was
engaged in, and marched day and night to Aquila, the key of the Abruzzi.
Thence he pushed on to the heights of Androssano, near the ruins of the
old Roman town of Alba, and appeared before the astounded Conradin, who
thus suddenly beheld in his immediate front an enemy he deemed far in
his rear. A day passed without blows: Charles made a reconnaissance;
Conradin, to frighten his opponent, to whom the fidelity of the
inhabitants of Aquila was most important, caused false deputies to be
introduced into his camp, dressed in municipal robes, and bearing
apparently the keys of their town. Informed of this event, Charles felt
very uneasy, but concealed his anxiety from all but three knights, with
whom he set out at nightfall and galloped to Aquila. He arrived at
midnight; the inhabitants were asleep. He struck upon the gates of the
citadel, and cried with a loud voice, “For whom do you hold this fort?”
“For King Charles,” replied the sentinel. “Then open, for I am the
king!” Reassured by the joyful reception he met, Charles returned to his
camp, weary with a ride that had lasted all night. But he had little
time for repose. Both armies were early afoot: on the one side the
flower of French and Provençal chivalry; on the other a medley of
Germans, Spaniards, and Italians. The forces were very unequal. Conradin
brought 6,000 horsemen into the field; Charles only half the number. On
both sides were equal fury, hatred, and eagerness to commence the fray.
Charles of Anjou’s audacity and impetuosity might possibly have had
disastrous results, but for the opportune arrival of Erard de Valéry,
constable of Champagne, his earliest friend and companion in arms.
“Erard was then very old, but still full of vigour. His colossal
stature, herculean vigour, and white hair gave him resemblance to the
centenary giant of an Arabian tale. Formerly he had refused to become a
priest, that he might remain in the society of princes and noble ladies.
Now, a true Christian soldier, he lived only in God. The old chevalier
was on his way from the Holy Land, returning to France with a hundred
good knights in his train. Whilst traversing the kingdom of Naples, he
heard of the king’s presence, and would not proceed without visiting
him.” Charles urged him to take part in the approaching fight. Erard
refused, alleging his age, his wish to die in peace far from human
turmoil, and, finally, a vow to fight only against infidels. Charles
overruled all objections, replying to the last one that his opponents
were excommunicated, and consequently worse than infidels. Then the wary
old chief arranged an ambush, which would have been utterly unsuccessful
with an ordinarily prudent foe, but which answered well enough with the
unlucky Conradin, who had not even made the necessary reconnaissances.
Charles, who had great deference for the Sire de Valéry, willingly put
himself under his orders, leaving him the direction of all things. The
army was divided into three bodies, of which the strongest, commanded by
Charles himself, was placed in ambush behind a hill in rear of the
Neapolitan position. The other two, sent forward against Conradin, were
beaten and cut to pieces, after a combat that lasted from sunrise till
six in the evening. Henry de Cousance, a French marshal, who resembled
Charles in stature and appearance, and who, with a purple mantle over
his armour and a crown upon his helm, took post in the centre of the
army, to personate the king, was killed early in the action. “Meanwhile
Charles of Anjou, in ambuscade with Erard de Valéry and his eight
hundred knights, trembled with rage. Burning with eagerness to strike
in, he rode up and down in rear of the hill, like a lion in his cage; he
was dying with impatience and grief, (_moriva di dolore_, says Villani,
_vedendo la sua gente cosi barattare_.) With inflamed eyes, he from time
to time looked Valéry in the face, thus silently demanding permission to
show himself and fight. He might have foreseen the massacre of his two
squadrons. The plan of battle adopted was likely to entail this
disaster. But what he had not foreseen was that it would be impossible
for him to support such a sight.” When the gallant Cousance fell,
pierced with a thousand blows, and Conradin’s army made the welkin ring
with exulting shouts of “Victory! the tyrant is dead!” Charles wept with
rage. But his promise to Valéry chained him to his rock of agony. What
follows is highly romantic and chivalrous. The knights who surrounded
him said, ‘So noble a fate is it to die for the justice of a royal
cause, that we would infinitely rejoice thus to lose our lives. Be well
assured, sire, that we will follow you every where, even to death.’ With
feverish impatience they waited the signal of Erard de Valéry, who
remained imperturbable. Suddenly Guillaume de l’Estendard (one of the
commanders of the troops already engaged) crossed the battle-field at
speed, feigning to fly, in order to draw the Spaniards on. They
followed. Then the old knight raised his enormous head and gigantic
person above the brow of the little hill, and said to the King,
‘_Marchons!_’ Charles was off like a dart, followed by Valéry and the
eight hundred chevaliers; they swept across the plain, and found
Conradin, Gualvano Lancia, and Frederick of Austria seated unhelmed and
unarmed on the bank of the little river Salto, like conquerors reposing;
whilst the German mercenaries were dispersed in search of booty,
stripping the dead and loading the spoils on carts. Charles and his
reserve of fresh and picked men had a cheap bargain of them, as also of
the Spaniards, who were taken prisoners, on their return from the
pursuit of Estendard, almost to a man. A complete victory, alloyed only
by a heavy loss of brave and devoted followers, remained to Charles of
Anjou. “Such,” says M. de St Priest, “was the celebrated battle of Alba,
improperly named the battle of Tagliacozzo, after a village more than
six miles from the scene of action. It is one of those deeds of arms of
which history will ever preserve the memory, less on account of the
greatness of the result, than for the dramatic interest attaching to the
quarrel and the men. On the one hand we see a young prince in the flush
of youth and brilliant valour, full of conviction of his good right, the
noblest and most unfortunate of pretenders; on the other, a warrior
terrible even to ferocity, but not less convinced of the legitimacy of
his cause, one of the greatest princes, and, beyond contradictio