tune.

We have heard much of the elegance and polish of Mansfield’s style, but,
from the imperfect reports of public speeches a hundred years ago, have
had but few evidences of its charm. One precious relic, however, these
volumes have preserved. On his taking leave of the society of Lincolns
Inn, (on his being raised to the Bench,) the usual complimentary address
was made by Mr Charles Yorke. The reply, of which we give but a
sentence, was as follows:—

“If I have had in any measure success in my profession, it is owing to
the great man who has presided in our highest courts of judicature the
whole time I attended the bar. It was impossible to attend him, to sit
under him every day, without catching some beams from his light. The
disciples of Socrates, whom I will take the liberty to call the great
lawyer of antiquity, since the first principles of all law are derived
from his philosophy, owe their reputation to their having been the
repeaters of the sayings of their great master. If _we_ can arrogate
nothing to ourselves, we can boast of the school we were brought up in.
The scholar may glory in his master, and we may challenge past ages to
show us his equal.”

After brief allusions to the three great names of Bacon, Clarendon, and
Somers, all of whom he regarded as inferior either in moral or natural
distinctions, he said,—“It is the peculiar felicity of the great man of
whom I am speaking, to have presided for nearly twenty years, and to
have shone with a splendour that has risen superior to faction, and that
has subdued envy.”

The melancholy case of Admiral Byng occurred in this year, (1757) and is
well reasoned in this work. The writer thinks that the execution was
just. A death by law is naturally distressing to the feelings of
humanity, and the degradation or banishment of the unfortunate admiral
might possibly have had all the effects of the final punishment, without
giving so much pain to the public feelings. Still, the cabinet might
justly complain of the clamour raised against their act, by the party
who arraigned them for the death of Byng. In command of a great fleet on
a most important occasion, he had totally failed, and failed in despite
of the opinions of his own officers. He had been sent for the express
purpose of relieving the British garrison of Minorca, and he was scared
away by the chance of encountering the French fleet: the consequence
was, the surrender of the island, and the capture of the garrison. On
his return to England, he was tried and found guilty by a court-martial:
he was found guilty by the general opinion of the legislature and the
nation; and though the court-martial recommended him to mercy, on the
ground that his offence was not poltroonery, but an “error in judgment;”
yet his reluctance to fight the French had produced such ruinous
consequences, and had involved the navy in such European disgrace, that
the King determined on his death, and he died accordingly. An error in
judgment which consists in _not_ fighting, naturally seems, to a brave
people, a wholly different offence from the error which consists in
grappling with the enemy. And, though Voltaire’s sarcasm, that Byng was
shot _pour encourager les autres_, had all the pungency of the
Frenchman’s wit, and though British admirals could require no stimulant
to their courage from the fear of a similar fate, there can be but
little doubt that this execution helped to make up the decisions of many
a perplexed mind in after times. The man who fights needs have no fear
of court-martials in England. This was a most important point gained.
The greatest of living soldiers has said, that the only fault which he
had to find with any of his generals, was their dread of responsibility.
The court-martial of Byng taught the British captains, in the phrase of
the immortal Nelson, that “the officer who grapples with his enemy, can
never be wrong.”

On the 25th of October King George II. died. He had been in good health
previously, had risen from bed, taken his chocolate, and talked of
walking in the gardens of Kensington. The page had left the room, and
hearing a noise of something falling, hurried back. He found the King on
the floor, who only said, “Call Amelia,” and expired. He was
seventy-seven years old, and had reigned thirty-four years.

The King left but few recollections, and those negative. He had not
connected himself with the feelings of the country; he had not
patronised the fine arts, nor protected literature. He was wholly
devoted to continental politics, and had adhered to some continental
habits, which increased his unpopularity with the graver portion of the
people of England.

In 1763 Lord Hardwicke’s health began visibly to give way. He had lost
his wife, and had lost his old friend the Duke of Newcastle. Death was
every where among the circle of those distinguished persons who had been
the companions of his active days. He had great comfort, however, in
that highest of comforts to old age, the distinctions and talents of his
sons, who had all risen into public rank. But the common fate of all
mankind had now come upon him; and on the 6th of March he breathed his
last. “Serene and composed, I saw him in his last moments, and he looked
like an innocent child in its nurse’s arms,” is the note of his son. He
was seventy-four. His remains were interred in the parish church of
Wimpole.

The peerage and estates still continue in the family, and are now
represented by the estimable and intelligent son of the late Admiral Sir
Joseph Yorke. On the death of the Chancellor’s eldest son, who had
succeeded to the title, the eldest son of Mr Charles Yorke became Lord
Hardwicke. This nobleman, who was remarkable for scholarship and
refinement of taste, had held the anxious office of Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland in the year of the Rebellion 1798. His son, Lord Royston, a very
accomplished person, being lost by shipwreck in the seas, the son of the
well-known admiral, who had been so unhappily killed by a flash of
lightning in a boat off Portsmouth, became the heir.

It is in the history of men like Lord Hardwicke that England justly
prides herself. Here is an instance of the prizes which lie before the
vigour, talents, and principles of her great men. The son of a country
solicitor rises to the highest rank of a subject, forces his way through
all the obstacles of narrow means, professional prejudice, learned
difficulty, and humble birth; takes his place among the first ranks of
the aristocracy, guides the law, shares in the first influence of the
state, is the pillar of government, and chief councillor of his king;
accumulates a vast fortune, becomes master of magnificent estates, and
founds a family holding in succession distinguished offices in church
and state, and still forming a portion of the nobility of England. And
all this was done by the talents of a single individual. Long may the
constitution live which offers such triumphs to integrity and learning,
and glory be to the country which has such men, and fixes her especial
renown on their fame!

The biography is vigorous, intelligent, and remarkably interesting. No
historian can in future write the “Reign of George II.” without it. It
passes through times of singular importance: and while the volumes are
essential to the student of legal history, they offer a high
gratification to the general reader.




                HOW WE GOT POSSESSION OF THE TUILLERIES.


                               CHAPTER I.
                            HEADS OR TAILS?

I like political ovations. It is a very pleasant thing to perambulate
Europe in the guise of a regenerator, sowing the good seed of political
economy in places which have hitherto been barren, and enlightening the
heathen upon the texture of calico, and the blessings of unreciprocal
free-trade. I rather flatter myself that I have excited considerable
sensation in certain quarters of Europe, previously plunged in darkness,
and unillumined by the argand lamp of Manchester philosophy. Since
September last, I have not been idle, but have borne the banner of
regeneration from the Baltic to the shores of the Bosphorus.

As the apostle of peace and plenty, I have every where been rapturously
greeted. Never, I believe, was there a sincerer, a more earnest wish
prevalent throughout the nations for the maintenance of universal
tranquillity than now; never a better security for that fraternisation
which we all so earnestly desire; never a more peaceful or
unrevolutionary epoch. Such, at least, were my ideas a short time ago,
when, after having fulfilled a secret mission of some delicacy in a very
distant part of the Continent, I turned my face homewards, and retraced
my steps in the direction of my own Glaswegian Mecca. In passing through
Italy, I found that country deeply engaged in plans of social
organisation, and much cheered by the sympathising presence of a member
of her Britannic Majesty’s cabinet. It was delightful to witness the
good feeling which seemed to prevail between the British unaccredited
minister and the scum of the Ausonian population,—the mutual politeness
and sympathy exhibited by each of the high contracting parties,—and the
perfect understanding on the part of the Lazzaroni, of the motives which
had induced the northern peer to absent himself from felicity awhile,
and devote the whole of his vast talents and genius to the cause of
foreign insurrection. I had just time to congratulate Pope Pius upon the
charming prospect which was before him, and to say a few hurried words
regarding the superiority of cotton to Christianity as a universal
tranquillising medium, when certain unpleasant rumours from the frontier
forced their way to the Eternal City, and convinced me of the propriety
of continuing my retreat towards the land of my nativity. Not that I
fear steel, or have any abstract repugnance to grape, but my mission was
emphatically one of peace; I had a great duty to discharge to my
country, and that might have been lamentably curtailed by the bullet of
some blundering Austrian.

Behold me, then, at Paris—that Aspasian capital of the world. I had
often visited it before in the character of a tourist and literateur,
but never until now as a politician. True, I was not accredited: I
enjoyed neither diplomatic rank, nor the more soothing salary which is
its accompaniment. But, in these times, such distinctions are rapidly
fading away. I had seen with my own eyes a good deal of spontaneous
diplomacy, which certainly did not seem to flow in the regular channel;
and, furthermore, I could personally testify to the weight attached
abroad to private commercial crusades. I needed no official costume; I
was the representative of a popular movement; I was the champion of a
class; and my name and my principles were alike familiar to the ears of
the illuminati of Europe. Formerly I had been proud of associating with
Eugène Sue, Charles Nodier, Paul de Kock, and other characters of
ephemeral literary celebrity; I had wasted my time in orgies at the Café
de Londres, or the Rocher de Cancale, and was but too happy to be
admitted to those little parties of pleasure in which the majority of
the cavaliers are feuilletonists, and the dames, terrestrial stars from
the constellation of the Théatre des Variétés. Now I looked back on this
former phase of my existence with a consciousness of having wasted my
energies. I had shot into another sphere—was entitled to take rank with
Thiers, Odillon Barrot, Crémieux, and other champions of the people; and
I resolved to comport myself accordingly. I do not feel at liberty to
enter into the exact details of the public business which detained me
for some time in Paris. It is enough to say, that I was warmly and
cordially received, and on the best possible terms with the members of
the _extreme gauche_.

One afternoon about the middle of February, I was returning from the
Chamber of Deputies, meditating very seriously upon the nature of a
debate which I had just heard, regarding the opposition of ministers to
the holding of a Reform banquet in Paris, and in which my friend Barrot
had borne a very conspicuous share. At the corner of the Place de la
Concorde, I observed a tall swarthy man in the uniform of the National
Guard, engaged in cheapening a poodle. I thought I recognised the
face—hesitated, stopped, and in a moment was in the arms of my
illustrious friend, the Count of Monte-Christo, and Marquis Davy de la
Pailleterie!

“_Capdibious!_” cried the author of Trois Mousquetaires—“Who would have
thought to see you here? Welcome, my dear Dunshunner, a thousand times
to Paris. Where have you been these hundred years?”

“Voyaging, like yourself, to the East, my dear Marquis,” replied I.

“Ah, bah! That is an old joke. I never was nearer Egypt than the Bois de
Boulogne; however, I did manage to mystify the good public about the
baths of Alexandria. But how came you here just now? _Dix mille