e for its battle-field, at last concentrated
itself in a single country. “Towards the middle of the thirteenth
century it was transported to the southern extremity of Italy, to the
rich and beautiful lands now composing the kingdom of Naples. The
quarrel of the investitures terminated by the crusade of Sicily; a
debate about ecclesiastical jurisdiction ended in a dispute concerning
territorial possession. But although reduced to less vast proportions
and more simple terms, the antagonism of the pontificate and the throne
lost nothing of its depth, activity, and strength. Far from becoming
weakened, it assumed the more implacable and rancorous character of a
personal encounter. The war became a duel. It was natural that this
should happen. So soon as a regular power was founded in the south of
Italy, Rome could not permit the same power to establish itself in the
north of the peninsula. The interest of the temporal existence of the
popedom, the geographical position of the States of the Church, rendered
this policy stringent. The Popes could never allow Lombardy and the Two
Sicilies to be united under one sceptre. A King of Naples, as King of
the Lombards, pressed them on all sides; but as Emperor he crushed them.
This formidable hypothesis realised itself. A German dynasty menaced the
Holy See, and was broken. A French dynasty was called to replace it, and
obtained victory, power, and duration.” When this occurred—when the
Pope, beholding from the towers of Civita Vecchia his earthly sway
menaced with annihilation, and the Saracen hordes of Sicily’s powerful
King ravaging the Campagna, fulminated anathemas upon the impious
invaders, and summoned to his aid a prince of France—Manfredi, Prince of
Tarento, or Mainfroy, as M. de St Priest prefers to call him, the
natural son of Frederick II., was the virtual sovereign of the Two
Sicilies. Frederick, who died in his arms, left him regent of the
kingdom during the absence in Germany of his legitimate son Conrad—named
his heir in preference to his grandson Frederick, the orphan child of
his eldest son Henry, who had died a rebel, conquered and captive. This
was not all. “The imperial will declared the Prince of Tarento bailiff
or viceroy of the Two Sicilies, with unlimited powers and regal rights,
whenever Conrad should be resident in Germany or elsewhere. Things were
just then in the state thus provided for. Mainfroy became _ipso facto_
regent of the kingdom; and the lucky bastard saw himself not only
eventually called to the powerful inheritance of the house of Suabia,
but preferred to the natural and direct heir of so many crowns.”

The death of Frederick the Hohenstauffe, who for long after his decease
was popularly known—as in our day a greater than he still is—as _the_
Emperor, revived the hopes and courage of Pope Innocent IV., who
resolved to strike a decisive blow at the power of the house of Suabia.
Mainfroy was then its representative in Italy. He was only nineteen—a
feeble enemy, so thought Innocent, whom a word from the pontifical
throne would suffice to level with the dust. But where the sanguine Pope
expected to find a child, he met a man, in talent, energy, and prudence.
These qualities Mainfroy displayed in an eminent degree in the struggle
that ensued; and when Conrad landed in his kingdom, which had been
represented to him as turbulent and agitated, he was astonished at the
tranquillity it enjoyed. He embraced his brother, and insisted on his
walking by his side, under the same dais, from the sea to the city. This
good understanding did not last long. Conrad was jealous of the man who
had so ably supplied his place, and jealousy at last became hatred. He
deprived Mainfroy of the possessions secured to him by his father’s
will, banished his maternal relatives with ignominy, and did all he
could, but in vain, to drive him to revolt. Under these circumstances,
it is not surprising that when Conrad died, at the age of twenty-six,
leaving Berthold, Margrave of Hohemburg, regent of the kingdom during
the minority of his son Conrad V., or Conradin—who had been born since
his departure from Germany, and whom he had never seen—there were not
wanting persons to accuse Mainfroy as an accessary to his death.
Mainfroy had already been charged—falsely, there can be little doubt—of
having smothered, under mattresses, his father and benefactor, the
Emperor Frederick. There was more probability, if not more truth, in the
accusation of fratricide; for, if Conrad had lived, doubtless Mainfroy
would, sooner or later, have been sacrificed to his jealousy or safety.
“The majority of chroniclers assign to Mainfroy, as an accomplice, a
physician of Salerno; and add, with the credulity of the times, that he
killed the King of the Romans by introducing diamond dust, an infallible
poison, into his entrails. Others, bolder or better informed, give the
name of the poisoner, and call him John of Procida.” Whether this death
resulted from poison or disease, it was hailed as a happy event by the
Italians, and with a great burst of laughter by the Pope, who at once
renounced his project of calling a foreign prince to the throne of
Sicily, and resumed, with fresh ardour, his plans of conquest and
annexation. Advancing to the Neapolitan frontier, he was there met by
the Prince of Tarento and the Margrave of Hohemburg, who came to place
themselves at his disposal, and to supplicate him on behalf of the
infant Conradin. The Pope, who saw a proof of weakness in this humility,
insisted that the Two Sicilies should be delivered up to the Church;
saying that he would then investigate the rights of Conradin, and admit
them if valid. The Margrave, alarmed at the aspect of things, made over
the regency to Mainfroy, who accepted it with affected repugnance. A
powerful party called this prince to the throne: it was the aristocratic
and national party, averse alike to papal domination and to the
government of a child. They entered into an agreement with Mainfroy, by
which they swore to obey him as regent, so long as the little King
should live; stipulating that if he died a minor, or without direct
heirs, the Prince of Tarento should succeed him as sovereign. The
Margrave of Hohemburg, faithless to the trust reposed in him by Conrad,
agreed to these conditions, and promised to deliver up to Mainfroy the
late King’s treasures. Instead of so doing, the double traitor made his
escape with them, leaving the new regent in such poverty that, in order
to pay his German mercenaries, he was compelled to sell the hereditary
jewels and gold and silver vases of his mother’s family.

If Mainfroy had made good fight in defence of Conrad’s rights, we may be
sure he did not less strenuously strive when his own claim was to be
vindicated. Unfortunate at first, and about to succumb to papal power
and intrigues, he, as a last resource, threw himself into the arms of
the Saracens of Lucera. These unbelievers had been greatly encouraged by
his father, who was passionately addicted to things oriental. “From his
infancy,” M. de St Priest says of Frederick, “he lived surrounded with
astrologers, eunuchs, and odaliques. His palace was a seraglio, himself
a sultan. This was quite natural. In Sicily all visible objects were
Asiatic. The external form of the houses, their internal architecture,
the streets, the baths, the gardens, even the churches, bore the stamp
of Islamism. The praises of God are still to be seen engraved in Arabic
on marble columns; and in the same language were they traced, in gold
and diamonds and pearls, upon the mantle and dalmatica of Sicily’s
Queens and Kings. Palermo was then called the trilingual city. Latin and
Arabic were equally spoken there; and the Italian, the _favella
volgare_, originated at the court of Frederick-Roger, under the Moorish
arcades of his palaces at Palermo and Catania. The language of Petrarch
was murmured, for the first time, beside the fountains of the Ziza. The
outward forms of Islamism were then, in southern Europe, the ensign
hoisted by that small number of liberal thinkers, the avowed enemies of
ecclesiastical and monkish domination, who willingly assumed the name of
Epicureans.” Further on we have the following, explanatory of the
peaceable settlement of the infidel in Sicily, and curiously
illustrating the contradictions and bigotry of the time. “With an
audacity previously unheard-of, Frederick II., after fighting and
conquering the Saracens who overran and disturbed Sicily, transported
entire colonies of them to Lucera, in the Capitanata, in the immediate
vicinity of the patrimony of St Peter, thus planting, in the heart of
his kingdom, the Mahomedan standard he was about to combat in Syria.
Decrepid though he was, Pope Honorius felt the danger and insult of such
proximity. What were the arms of the holy see against an opponent that
none of its anathemas could touch? The Pontiff became indignant, vented
threats; but was soon appeased. When the wily Frederick saw him angry,
he promised a crusade; whereupon the Pope calmed himself, and treated
the Emperor as a son.” Subsequent Popes were less easy to pacify, and
ban and excommunication were heaped upon the Emperor’s head. Gregory
IX., in his bulls, called him “_a marine monster, whose jaws are full of
blasphemies_;” to which complimentary phrase Frederick replied by the
epithets of “_great dragon, antichrist_,” and “_new Balaam_.” A third
extract will complete the sketch of the Saracens, and their position in
Sicily. “Surrounded by odaliques and dancing women; giving eunuchs for
guards to his wife, the beautiful Isabella Plantagenet, a daughter of
the English King; often clothed in oriental robes; in war-time mounted
on an elephant; in his palace surrounded by tame lions; always
accompanied by a troop of Mussulmans, to whom he showed great
indulgence, permitting them the violation of churches and women, debauch
and sacrilege,—Frederick II., in the opinion of his subjects, was no
longer a Christian prince. During the last ten years of his reign this
state of things reached its height. The number of barbarian troops daily
increased. Seventeen new companies, summoned from Africa, were
dispersed, like an invading army, over the Basilicata and Calabria.
Finally, the Emperor went so far as to instal them in the places of
masters of ports, and in other offices that gave these Mussulmans
jurisdiction over Christian populations.” And when a Saracen captain,
named Phocax, in garrison at Trani, ill-treated a citizen of noble
birth, Messer Simone Rocca, and grossly outraged his wife, the aggrieved
man could obtain no satisfaction. “The Emperor only laughed. ‘_Messer
Simone_,’ he said, to the complainant, ‘_dov’è forza non è vergogna_.
Go, Phocax will not do it again; had he been a native of the country, I
would have had his head cut off.’” On the death of this indulgent
patron, the Saracen colony in the kingdom of Naples saw its existence
menaced. The infidels were lost if Rome became mistress of the country.
The triumph of the Pope would be the tocsin of their extermination. They
resolved to defend themselves to the last. They held Lucera, Accerenza,
and Girafalco, three impregnable fortresses; they also commanded at
other points, less strong but still important. They felt themselves
numerous, courageous, and determined. Mainfroy could not doubt that they
would gladly rally round the banner of their benefactor’s son; and in
this hope he set out for Lucera, where John the Moor then commanded.
This man, a slave whom the Emperor’s caprice had raised to the highest
dignities, promised Mainfroy the best of receptions. But when the Prince
of Tarento reached Lucera, the traitor had gone over to the Pope, taking
with him a thousand Saracens and three hundred Germans, and leaving the
town in the keeping of a man of his tribe, Makrizi by name. On learning
this treachery, Mainfroy still did not renounce his project of confiding
himself to the Arabs—so cherished by his father, so favoured by himself.
Only, instead of approaching the fortress with his little army, as
regent of the kingdom, he preferred to go as a knight-errant, attended
only by three esquires, like a paladin of the Round Table. This portion
of Mainfroy’s life, as well as many other passages in M. de St Priest’s
book, reads like an extract from some old romance of chivalry. After
wandering about, in the gloom and rain of a November night, and losing
his way repeatedly, Adenulfo, one of Mainfroy’s three men-at-arms, and
formerly forester to Frederick II., perceived a white object in the
darkness, and recognised a hunting-lodge built by the Emperor. He
conducted the prince thither, and they lighted a large fire,—a most
imprudent act, for the flame was easily perceptible at Foggia, where
Otho of Hohemburg was then in garrison with a portion of the papal army.
But Mainfroy was young and a poet. At sight of the splendid trees
blazing on the hearth, he forgot the present, and thought only of the
past; perhaps he recalled the time, not yet very distant, when as a
child, on winter nights like that one, and perchance in that very place,
he had seen his father, on his return from an imperial hunt, seat
himself at that same hearth, and talk familiarly with his attendants of
his wars and his amours, singing the praises of the lovely
Catalanas,[17] and venting curses on the Pope. The illusion was of short
duration. At early dawn Mainfroy and his little escort took horse, and
after an hour’s march they beheld, through the misty morning air, the
tall hill of Lucera, and on its summit the Saracen citadel and its
massive walls, crowned with two-and-twenty towers. But the guardians 