ey passed through, that London was in an uproar and
his Grace fled. Nay, the mobs gathered in crowds about his house, and
saw some of the shutters unopened, whence they concluded he was gone;
and when he went out they surrounded his chariot, and looked him in the
face and said, “It is he! he is not gone. What is our condition, when
such monstrous lies are spread to increase the terrors of honest minds?”

The Archbishop’s exertions gave great satisfaction to the King, whom he
had so worthily and courageously served; and the Chancellor immediately
wrote him an account of an interview which he had with his Majesty on
the occasion. “I own,” said he, “I feel a particular pleasure in the
great and noble part which your Grace has taken on this occasion, and in
the gallant, wise, and becoming manner in which you have exerted
yourself. I was so full of it, that I went immediately to Kensington,
and gave the King an ample account of it in his closet. I found him
apprised of it in the Lord Lieutenant’s letters, which he had received
from the Duke of Newcastle; but he was so pleased with it that he was
desirous of hearing it over again. I informed his Majesty of the
substance of your letter, the sermon your Grace had preached last
Sunday, and with such prodigious expedition printed and dispersed; and
when I came to your speech, he desired me to show it him. His Majesty
read it over from beginning to end, gave it the just praise it so highly
deserves, and said it must be printed. I told him I believed it was
printing at York, but it is determined to print it in the Gazette. When
I had gone through this part, I said, your Majesty will give me leave to
acquaint my Lord Archbishop that you approve his zeal and activity in
your service—to which the King answered quick, My lord, that is not
enough; you must also tell the Archbishop that I heartily thank him for
it. His Majesty also highly applauded the affection, zeal, and unanimity
which had appeared in the several lords and gentlemen on this occasion.”

The Chancellor also informs him that ten British regiments had arrived
from Flanders, and that eight battalions more, and 1500 dragoons were
ordered to embark. He then makes a natural and just remark on the
faction that had clamoured against putting the country into a state of
defence. “I know some friends of yours who had talked themselves hoarse
in contending for this measure, and whose advice, if followed some time
ago, might have prevented, in all human probability, this dismal scene.
But the conduct of _some persons_ on this occasion has been infamous.”
He then marks the true conduct to be adopted in all instances of civil
war. “A great body of forces will forthwith be sent to the North. I
contend every where, that they must be a _great body_, for the
protection of the King’s crown and his people. The work of the
Revolution, which has been building up these seven-and-fifty years, must
not be risked upon an even chance.” Such is true policy. The defence of
an empire must not be risked upon a chance; the benighted and dishonest
theorists, who would enfeeble the defences of England in our day, for
the sake of gaining the clamour of a mob, would be the first to fly in
the hour of danger; and although the _certainty_ of a French war from
the ambition of the monarchy, is at an end, and the Prince de Joinville
is not likely to realise the suggestions of his detestable pamphlet, and
have the honour of pouncing on our sea-coast villages; a Republic is a
neighbour to which we have not been accustomed for a long while, and
which, with the best intentions for the present, may very suddenly
change its mind.

Another letter from Herring shows the gallant spirit which may exist
under lawn sleeves. “I purposed,” said he, “to have set out for London
on Wednesday; but I have had a sort of remembrance from the city here
(York) that it will create some uneasiness. There is a great matter in
opinion; and if my attendance at Bishopsthorpe serves to support a
spirit, or to preserve a union, or that the people think so, I will not
stir.... I have therefore put off my journey, but ordered my affairs so,
that at the least intimation from your Lordship, I can _vasa
conclamare_, and set out in an hour. To talk in the style military,
(though my red coat is not made yet,) the first _column_ of my family
went off a week ago, the second moves on Wednesday, and the third
attends my motions. I purpose to leave my house in a condition to
receive the Marshal, if he pleases to make use of it. And there is a
sort of policy in my civility, too; for while he occupies it, it cannot
be plundered. I know your Lordship has ever an anxiety for your friends.
But, if I must fly, the General and his hussars have offered to cover my
retreat. But enough of this; I had rather laugh when the battle is won,
and could not help putting up an ejaculation at the pond-side
to-night,—Heaven grant I may feed my swans in peace!”

The mention of the red coat was probably suggested by a report that the
Archbishop had been seen in uniform. And the “hussars” were a troop of
young gentlemen, whom General Oglethorpe had embodied at York.

The prelate was somewhat of a humorist; and he thus writes on his
military reputation:—“I find I must go into regimentals, in my own
defence, in a double sense; for an engraver has already given me a
Saracen’s head, surrounded with a chevalier in chains, and all the
instruments of war, and the hydra of rebellion at my feet. And I see
another copperplate promised, where I am to be exhibited in the same
martial attitude, with all my clergy with me. By my troth, as I judge
from applications made to me every day, I believe I could raise a
regiment of my own order. And I had a serious offer the other day from a
Welch curate, from the bottom of Merionethshire, who is six feet and a
half high, that, hearing that I had put on scarlet, he was ready to
attend me at an hour’s warning, if the Bishop of Bangor did not call
upon him for the same service.”

The disregard of all preparation had left the whole English border
defenceless. Hull and Carlisle were the only towns which had any means
of resistance. York had walls, but they were in a state of decay, and
had not a single piece of artillery. Thus the invaders were enabled to
pursue any road which they pleased. But their entrance into England
should have taught them that their enterprise had become hopeless. The
country people every where fled before them—the roads were filled with
the carriages and waggons of the gentry hurrying to places of safety. No
gentleman of rank joined them. One army was on their rear, and the main
army, under the Duke of Cumberland, was between them and London.

In the metropolis, the spirit of the people, always slow, until the
danger is visible, now awoke. The lawyers, in a procession of two
hundred and fifty carriages, carried up an address to the King, assuring
him of their loyalty. The trained bands were summoned. Troops were sent
to the coast to watch the French, if they should attempt invasion;
alarm-posts and signals were appointed in case of tumults in London, and
the capital was at length in safety against a much superior force to
that of the Chevalier. But in December the gratifying news came, that on
the 5th the invaders had retired from Derby, and were rapidly returning
to the North.

The disorder and exhaustion of those gallant but unfortunate men, must
have left them an easy prey to the superior forces which were now on
their track, when the pursuit was suddenly stopped by an alarm of French
invasion. Twelve thousand men had suddenly been collected; the Duke of
Richelieu, with the Pretender’s second son, had come to Dunkirk;
transports were gathered along the coast; and the invasion would
probably have been attempted, but for a storm which drove many of their
ships ashore near Calais. The troops in London were but six thousand!
The 16th of April, at Culloden, closed this most unhappy struggle, and
gave an internal peace to England which has never been broken.

The remarks in the memoir on this daring enterprise seem to be
imperfect. The first is, that if England was to have been invaded at
all, the effort should have been made before the army could be brought
from Flanders. The second is, that the retreat from Derby should have
been exchanged for a march on London. But the former would have required
a totally different plan of operations. The Prince should have landed in
Kent, if his object was to take London by surprise. But, as his only
troops must be the clans, he must look for them in the North; and it
would have been impossible to march an army from the Highlands to the
metropolis in less than a fortnight. On the second point, the retreat
from Derby was obviously necessary. The clans were already
diminishing—every step must be fought for—they were but half armed—and
the King’s troops were increasing day by day.

In one remark we agree, that the Chevalier should never have attempted
more than the possession of Scotland. He should have remained in
Holyrood House. There he had a majority of the nation in his favour,—the
heads of the clans, and the old romantic recollections of his ancestral
kings, all tending to support his throne. A French force might have been
easily summoned to his assistance, and for a while he might have
maintained a separate sovereignty. It is, on the other hand, not
improbable that the Scottish nation might have looked on the sovereignty
of a son of James, the persecutor, with jealousy; Protestantism would
have dreaded a French alliance; and the expulsion of the Chevalier would
have been effected in Scotland on the model of the English expulsion of
James. Still, the experiment was feasible for the claimant of a crown;
and the success of the adventure might have continued long enough to
produce great evil to both countries.

We have found these volumes highly interesting, not merely from the
importance of their period, but from their containing events so
curiously parallel to those of our own time. Among the rest was the
appointment to the Archbishopric of Canterbury. A letter from Charles
Yorke thus says:—“The Archbishop of Canterbury died suddenly on
Saturday. The Bishop of London has declined the offer of succeeding. It
is now offered to the Bishop of Salisbury, who has not yet returned an
answer. If he refuses, which some say he will, the Archbishop of York
will be the man.”

The reasons for these refusals were probably the reluctance to change,
at the advanced age of these bishops,—Sherlock, of Salisbury, being
seventy, and Gibson probably about the same age. The fees for possession
are also immense, and we have heard them rated at little short of
£20,000.

The Lord Chancellor announced the offer to the Archbishop of York, who
returned the following remarkable answer:—“I am honoured with your
Lordship’s of the 13th inst., which I embrace with all my heart, as a
new instance of that friendship and affection for me which for so many
years have been the support, and credit, and comfort of my life.

“I have considered the thing, my best friend and my most honoured Lord,
with all deliberation and compass of thought that I am master of, and am
come to a very firm and most resolved determination not to quit the See
of York on any account or on any consideration.... I am really poor; I
am not ambitious of being rich, but have too much pride, with, I hope, a
small mixture of honesty, to bear being in debt. I am now out of it, and
in possession of a clear independency of that sort. I must not go back,
and begin the world again at fifty-five.

“The honour of Canterbury is a thing of glare and splendour, and the
hopes of it a _proper incentive to schoolboys_ to industry. But I have
considered all its inward parts, and examined all its duties, and if I
should quit my present station to take it, I will not answer for it that
in less than a twelvemonth I did not sink and die with regret and envy
at the man who should succeed me here, and quit the place in my
possession, as I ought to do, to one better and wiser than myself.”

This language might have been received with some suspicion in other
instances; but Herring was a straightforward as well as a very able man,
and there can be no doubt that he spoke what he thought. But he seems to
have mistaken the position of the Primate as one of splendour, for we
certainly have seen instances in which it displayed any thing but
splendour, and in which the great body of the clergy knew no more of the