thus of the Mosaic law, if he had known it. But one of the
most extraordinary circumstances of the Hebrew commonwealth, is the
general ignorance of its incomparable institutions, which prevailed
among the most active inquirers of the northern world. But law existed
from the earliest periods in Greece, though its name was often and
curiously changed. In the time of Homer, the name of law was _Themis_,
or establishment. In the time of Hesiod, the name was _Nomos_, or
distribution. In after times, it was _Dikè_, or justice. The cause of
the Greek want of system was said to be the _number_ of judges in their
courts, which rendered the decision rather matter of popular sentiment
than of fixed rule.

The systematic nature of the Roman law arose from there being in general
but _one_ judge in each court. The two prætors—the one for the city, and
the other for the external jurisdiction—were annually appointed, and
were accustomed, on entering on their offices, to state the rules on
which they intended to act. Those rules became gradually embodied, and
finally formed the groundwork of the Roman law.

In the language of Rome, Law was _Lex_, from _Lego_, as the proposal of
the rule was _read_ by the magistrate to the assembly of the people. The
Anglo-Saxon name was Laga, from _Legen_, to lay down—from which comes
our word Law.

Law in England ascends as high as the time of the Druids, who, however,
had no written code. But they seem to have left us the custom of
Gavelkind—the division of the property of an intestate between the widow
and the children, and the burning of a widow found guilty of her
husband’s murder.

The Roman, Pictish, and Saxon invasions, with the Heptarchy, filled the
country with a general confusion of laws, until the time of Alfred. This
great king and man of genius undertook to remodel the whole constitution
of the West-Saxon monarchy—a design, for whose execution he has been
praised by all the philosophic lawyers, as exhibiting the highest
sagacity.

The principle of his reform was, to make every man answerable to an
immediate superior for his personal conduct, and that of his
neighbourhood. For this purpose, England was divided into tithings and
hundreds, and perhaps into counties, all being under a supreme
magistrate—the king. He also collected into a volume all the customs of
the various districts, which he issued for the guidance of the several
country courts. Those in their turn were liable to account to the king’s
courts, which were kept in the royal household, and which travelled with
this great king, whose life seems to have been chiefly occupied in
traversing the kingdom as high minister of law, and teaching its
principles to his people.

The Danish invasions shook this code, but had not the power to crush it.
It was renewed by King Edgar, a man of vigour and talents. The digest
was completed by his grandson, Edward the Confessor—the whole forming
the common law, or law _common_ to the whole realm.

The principles of the Saxon law, which were the principles of their
fathers in the German forests, and were the principles of truth and
nature, were briefly these:—The establishment of the Wittena-gemote, or
assembly of wise men—a species of parliament, without which no new law
could be made, or old one changed; the election of all magistrates by
the people; the hereditary descent of the crown; the commutation of
capital punishments, on the first offence, for a fine; military service
in proportion to land; forfeiture of land for treason, but _not_
corruption of blood; the descent of lands to all the male’s equally,
without right of primogeniture, (a rule unworthy of Saxon wisdom;) the
use of county courts in ordinary cases, with courts held before the king
in the higher; last, and most important of all, trial by jury (though
trial was also held by ordeal.)

Of those principles, some were evidently unfit for subsequent
civilisation; and some refined themselves. But the whole system, when
compared with the old Roman code, and with many of the codes of Europe
which followed it, exhibits an extraordinary evidence of the manliness
of feeling, and justness of conception, existing among the Saxon
ancestry of England.

In the eleventh century, the Norman Conquest burst in upon the country
with the force of an inundation, and swept before it throne, liberty,
and _laws_. The influence of Rome now began to act powerfully on the
people. Ecclesiastical courts were formed, separate from the civil, and
the Romish priesthood were gradually exempted from the secular power.

Another formidable innovation was in the “royal forests.” The Norman
kings were “mighty hunters,” and whole counties were stripped of their
population, to give room for beasts of chase. They transplanted the
forest laws of the Continent into England, and the penalties of their
game laws were terrible. In the Saxon times, though no man was allowed
“to kill the king’s deer,” yet every man was allowed to kill the game on
his own estate. But the Norman law made the king the proprietor of _all
game_, and no man could kill bird of the air, or beast of the field,
without express royal license, by a grant of _free-warren_, which was
more for the purpose of preserving the game than giving a right to the
subject.

With one exception, the Norman invasion was an unequivocal calamity.
That exception was the right of primogeniture—a right essential to the
establishment of a nobility, to the permanence of families in a
condition of honour, and to the prevention of a gradual pauperism and
degradation of society, as the lands became divided more and more. In
all others, it was a sudden and mischievous extinction of all popular
rights, and of all the principles of national progress. It made law
arbitrary by curtailing the power of the county courts, and giving it to
the king’s Norman justiciers, who thus became masters of every thing,
and, by their Norman subtleties, altogether confused the national law.
It introduced the feudal law, which was tyrannical in its essence. It
almost excluded the national language from all public use, Norman-French
alone being used in all the courts. It introduced the trial by combat,
the origin of that custom which, under the name of duelling, authorises
murder, provided the murdered man has previously had formal notice that
his murder was intended; and also, that he had a chance of adding the
murder of his adversary to his own. And to this Norman tyranny was due
the whole long series of ruinous wars, which involved both England and
France in infinite wretchedness, for little less than a hundred and
fifty years.

The Saxon law continued in this state of humiliation until the reign of
John, with slight occasional advances towards freedom. But, in this
reign, the severity of the forest laws roused the barons into
insurrection, and the King was forced to sign the two famous
regulations, the Forest Charter, and the Great Charter. The former
diminished some of the cruelties of the forest law, and the latter laid
the foundations of the Constitution, by restoring the general principles
of the Saxon law. It protected the subject from the severity of royal
fines and royal loans, and considerably narrowed the wasteful
expenditure of the throne. In private rights, it established the
testamentary power of the husband over part of his estates, and the law
of dowery. In public police, it established a uniformity of weights and
measures, gave protection to commercial strangers, and forbade the
alienation of lands by mortmain. In matters of public justice, it
forbade all denials and delays of justice, established the court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, to relieve the suitor from following the
courts round the country; directed assizes and annual circuits to be
held, and appointed inquests. It established the liberties of London,
and of all the cities, towns, and ports of England. And finally, and by
its noblest act of power, it declared the protection of every man in his
life, liberty, and property, unless convicted by the judgment of his
peers, or the law of the land. This was perhaps the noblest document
ever published by a people, and well deserves its name of MAGNA CHARTA.

In the Popish controversy of our day, the existence of Magna Charta has
been adduced as a proof of the freedom encouraged under Popery. But it
is forgotten that the whole proceeding was instantly denounced by the
Pope, and laid under anathema. It was a recurrence to the laws of their
Saxon ancestors, demanded by the severe necessities of the time, and
originating in impulses of human nature too strong for the bondage of
the national superstition.

The glorious Reformation in the sixteenth century produced a hidden and
powerful change in the aspect of English law. The Papal supremacy fell,
and relieved the law of a most intolerable obstruction. The crown became
the true head of the government. Man no longer gave a divided allegiance
to an English monarch and an Italian monk; and the appointment of the
bishops was thenceforth taken from foreign hands, and invested in the
sovereign of the realm. Freedom now began to make palpable progress; for
although the prerogative was still unabated, and was often tyrannical in
the reigns of Henry, Mary, and Elizabeth, there was a growing tendency
to its abatement; and its use by Elizabeth was in general so lenient, as
to be scarcely perceptible.

A general change in English society also powerfully co-operated with
this progress. Peace had brought commerce, and commerce wealth to the
merchant: the lower orders, of course, shared in the general prosperity,
and their condition became more important in the national eyes, and in
their own. The nobles, disdaining commerce, became unable to compete
with the new generation of opulence, and dissipated their estates, which
fell into the hands of the citizens. On the other hand, the throne,
enriched by the confiscation of the monasteries, became hourly more
independent of the barons; and the contest for power was evidently to be
thenceforth determined between the throne and the people.

The glories of Elizabeth, her services to religion, and her gentle
exercise of the sceptre, had reconciled the nation to the prerogative.
But the accession of James awoke the nation: his manners were offensive,
his habits were unmanly, he wanted the dignity of Elizabeth on the
throne, and he wanted the spirit of her government among the people. His
death left a legacy of revolution. His son had been intended by nature
for private life, but he was marked by misfortune to be a king. Brave
without fortitude, and graceful without sincerity, he would have made an
incomparable figure in his own court, if he had not been encumbered with
the high duties of a throne. Charles was destined to be undone, from the
time when he began to revive the obsolete statutes of the forest law,
sustain the severities of the Star Chamber and High Commission courts,
and raise arbitrary taxes in the shape of tonnage and poundage. The
disuse of parliaments alienated from him every lover of liberty.
Hampden, a name deserving of all honour in the history of freedom,
struck the first blow at the new fabric of tyranny, by his resistance to
ship-money. The King himself hurried on his ruin, by concessions as
precipitate as his demands had been unjustifiable; and this most
melancholy of all struggles ended in the most melancholy of all
consummations—a military tyranny.

The restoration of the Stuarts gave us the Habeas Corpus Act—an
illustrious memorial of national good sense, and of national security.
Magna Charta had gone no further than to forbid imprisonment, contrary
to law. The Habeas Corpus gave the man power to release himself, and
punish his injurers.

The glorious Revolution of 1688 gave another impulse to the whole system
of English liberty. It pronounced the authority of law to be supreme. It
gave us the Bill of Rights, the Toleration Act, and the Act of
Settlement. It justified the doctrine of necessary resistance; it
regulated trials for high treason; it modelled the Civil List; it made
the administration of the income accountable to parliament; and
constituted the judges independent of the throne.

The constitution was now complete, or if not, all the improvements still
necessary to make it such, were prepared in the nature of