gaming-tables. He discovers that his “feelings are too
refined” for the roughness of English life—that his frame is “too
delicate for anything but a southern climate”—boasts of his
sensibilities, while he is leading a life of the most vulgar and gross
vice—until, beggared by debauchery, or worn out with disease, he drops
into the tomb, without leaving a regret or a manly recollection behind
him. For all the higher purposes of life he had long been ruined—without
country, without public spirit, without a sense of duty, he has lived
only to eat and drink, to retail the gossip of the hour, and yawn
through the day. He has abandoned _all religion_, and professes to think
all creeds alike. His morals are of the same quality with his religion,
and he creeps through society as worthless as the worm that shall soon
feed on his better half—his body—in the grave.

Lord Hardwicke had now full opportunity for the display of all his
talents; and their combination in one man was certainly an extraordinary
evidence of the powers of discipline and nature. He was at once a
first-rate lawyer, a first-rate statesman, and a first-rate public
speaker. Any one of those high attainments might bring sufficient to
make the business of a life—in him they were the easy attributes of a
master-mind.

His oratory was not of the school which afterwards gave such eminence to
Chatham. It had none of the brilliant impetuosity of that Demosthenes of
English orators; but it had a captivation—the captivation of eloquence
and grace—which gave interest even to the driest details of the
tribunal. Lord Camden, himself a powerful public speaker, thus described
Hardwicke on the bench:—

“In the Court of Chancery, multitudes would flock to hear the Lord
Chancellor, as _to hear Garrick_. His clearness, arrangement, and
comprehension of his subject, were masterly. But his _address_ in the
turn which he gave to all, whether he was in the right, or was ‘to make
the worse appear the better reason,’ was like _magic_.”

His high employments now brought opulence with them; and he purchased
from Lord Oxford the fine estate of Wimpole, in Cambridgeshire, which
had come into the Oxford family by marriage with the Duke of Newcastle’s
heiress. In 1740, Philip Yorke, the Chancellor’s eldest son, married the
daughter of Lord Breadalbane, and grand-daughter of the Duke of Kent.
Horace Walpole, in his correspondence with Conway, thus smartly sums up
the good fortune of this most prosperous family:

“Harry, what luck the Chancellor has! first, indeed, to be in himself so
great a man. But then, in accidents. He is made Chief Justice and Peer,
when Talbot is made Chancellor and Peer. Talbot dies in a twelvemonth,
and leaves him the Seals, at an age when others are scarcely made
solicitors. Then he marries his son into one of the first families of
Britain, obtains a patent for a marquisate, and eight thousand pounds
a-year, after the Duke of Kent’s death. The Duke _dies in a fortnight_,
and leaves them all! People talk of fortune’s wheel that is always
rolling; troth, my Lord Hardwicke has overtaken her wheel, and rolled
along with it.”

The present attempt to give legislative power to the Jews, an attempt
whose success would inevitably change the _Christian character_ of the
legislature, gives a revived interest to the following decision of the
great Chancellor. A legacy of £12,000 having been left by a Jew, “for
establishing an assembly for reading and improving the Jewish law,” and
the case having been brought into court, the Chancellor decided against
the application of the legacy. The note of this judgment, recorded in
his own note-book, is as follows:—

“I was of opinion, that this appeared to be a charitable bequest or fund
for promoting and propagating the Jewish religion, and consequently
_contrary to law_. For that the Christian religion _is part of the law
of the land_, and involved in the _constitution of this kingdom_,
according to my Lord Hale in Taylor’s case, 1 Ventr., and my Lord
Raymond in Wolston’s case; and that it differed widely from the cases of
charitable benefactions to the meeting-houses or congregations of
Protestant dissenters, which are tolerated, and regulated by the
Toleration Act. Therefore, I _refused_ to decree for this charity.”

In March 1745, died the celebrated Sir Robert Walpole: of all the
ministers of George the Second the most trusted, and of all the
ministers of England the most unpopular; of all the statesmen of his day
the most successful, and certainly, of all the public men of England,
regarded, in his own time, as the most unscrupulous. If it be doubted
that he was personally more unprincipled than other ministers, to him
unquestionably was due the _practice_ of corruption as an established
principle of government. That any minister could have dared to adopt
such a system in England, is to be accounted for only by the rapid
changes of party since the beginning of the century, the changes of the
Succession, the timidity of the press, yet but in its infancy, and the
unsettled nature of the Brunswick throne.

In late years, Burke, inflamed with the love of splendid paradox, and
delighting in the novelty of imagining personal virtue in the midst of
public vice, amused his genius with throwing a factitious lustre over
the memory of Walpole. But the voice of contemporary writers has been
since amply echoed by the judgment of history. Walpole _was_ a
corrupter; and, if the progress of his system had not been broken short
by his fall, and by the hurried successions of ministers from each side
of the House alternately, the government would perhaps have perished, or
could have purified itself only by a revolution.

Walpole was a first-rate man of _craft_; his sagacity was vigilant; his
industry was indefatigable; his speech plausible, and his management of
the uncouth and suspicious King dexterous in a remarkable degree. But he
lowered the whole tone of public life. No act of magnanimous policy ever
originated with Walpole. He made no attempt, or but of the feeblest
order, to add to the national intelligence. He encouraged none of the
higher provinces of the arts, learning, or science; and, though he gave
mitres to Butler, Gibson, and Sherlock, yet the religion of England
languished scarcely less than its philosophy. It was what Burke himself
subsequently termed its succeeding period, “burgomaster age,” and
parliament was scarcely more than a Dutch council, until Chatham came
and startled it again into life. Walpole obtains credit with posterity
for the moderation of his wealth. But, beginning as the son of a country
gentleman, he purchased a fine estate; he built a magnificent mansion,
Houghton; he collected one of the finest private picture-galleries in
Europe; and he always lived, so far as we can learn, in great affluence
and expenditure.

But the country was suddenly to be tried by a new and most formidable
hazard. News arrived in London that the Prince Charles Edward, the
eldest son of the Pretender, had landed in Scotland, had raised the
standard of the Stuarts, had been joined by some of the clans, and was
determined on marching to the metropolis. This part of the Memoir is
peculiarly interesting, from its giving the private impressions of
individuals of rank and importance, on the everyday movements of the
time.

On the 1st of August, Lady Hardwicke, who was, of course, acquainted
with all the opinions of government, writes to her son Philip Yorke, who
was then out of town:—“My heart is very heavy. Our folks are very busy
at this time, by fresh alarms of the Pretender being in Scotland. But I
believe the ship Captain Bret fought was the ship he was in. If it be
so, he is not yet got there; which may give a little more time to
prepare for him. The French disclaim sending him there; but that is
nothing. They are to take Ostend; while Spain sends troops thence, to
the other end of the kingdom, to distract our measures. This is my
opinion, God grant I may be in the wrong. In the mean time, our king’s
abroad, and our troops also. There comes out a proclamation this day,
offering a reward for the Pretender, as I am informed.”

Lord Hardwicke had been appointed one of the Regency, on the King’s
absence in Germany. And his views of the crisis were gloomy enough. In a
letter to Lord Glenorchy (August 15) he says, “On Tuesday last we
received advice from the Duke of Argyle and my Lord Justice Clerk, that
the young Pretender was landed in the north-west parts of the Highlands.
He is said to have come in a single ship of 16 or 18 guns, attended by
about 70 persons, among whom are Lord Tullibardine and old Lochiel. When
I look round me, and consider our whole situation, _our all appears to
be at stake_.”

“The yachts sailed this morning for the King, who has declared he will
set out from Hanover, as soon as he has heard they have arrived on the
other side.”

This was desponding language from so eminent a person, but it was
produced by deeper feelings than alarm at the landing of a few people in
the north, though with a prince at their head. The plain truth, and no
man was better aware of it than Hardwicke, was, that the conduct of the
late Cabinet had utterly disgusted the nation. The contempt justly felt
for Walpole had spread to higher objects; and the nation looked with an
ominous quietude on the coming struggle between the young Chevalier and
the possessor of the throne. As if the factions of parliament had been
preparing for the success of the Stuarts, all their efforts for the last
ten years had been directed to dismantle the country; all their
harangues were turned to extinguishing the army, which they described as
at once ruinous to the finances, and dangerous to the liberties of the
country. Probably there was not a man of all those declaimers who
believed a single syllable which he uttered; but “Reduction” was the
party cry. With France in immense military power; with the Stuarts
living under its protection; with the whole force of Popery intriguing
throughout the country; and with a great number of weak people, who
thought that their consciences called for the return of the exiled
dynasty in the person of the Pretender, the reduction of the national
defences by the ministry fell little short of treason. But when the
intelligence of the prince’s arrival was brought to London, the kingdom
seems to have been left almost without a soldier; every battalion being
engaged in the lingering war in Germany. The King had not added to the
strength of his government; his passion for going to Hanover had
occasioned obvious public inconvenience, and his absence at the moment
of public peril was felt with peculiar irritability. The Chancellor, on
this subject, after alluding to his recovery from a slight illness,
says, “Would to God, the state of our affairs were as much mended; but
the clouds continue as black as ever; and how soon the storm may burst
on us, we know not.”

On the first news of the Chevalier’s landing, a message had been sent to
the King, to return with all haste, which he did, as is mentioned in a
letter of the Chancellor to the Archbishop of York. After speaking of
the difficulties of government, the letter closes with, “I had writ thus
far, when a messenger from Margate brought the good news that the King
landed there about half an hour after three this morning, and would be
at Kensington within two hours. Accordingly, his Majesty arrived there
about two o’clock, in perfect health. I really think I never saw him
look better in my life. He appears also to be in very good humour, and
to value himself upon the haste he has made to us, when there was any
apprehension of danger affecting this country.”

In another letter, he sadly laments the absence of all public interest
in the event of the Rebellion. “Can you tell what will make _double
hearts_ true?... I have not slept these two nights; _but sweat and
prayed_.... The Duke of Argyle is come to town, and done nothing; and
Duke Athol is gone to a town in the Highlands, and does nothing neither.
He has had Glengarrie with him, whose clan has joined the Pretender, and
he is gone from him. In short, every thing is in a strange way, and
nobody, hardly, is affected as they ought; at least as I am.... This is
the real state of things, however they may be disguised, and I fear Sir
J. Cope’s _not equal to his business_. God alone can save us, to whose
merciful judgment we trust.”

The late Sydney Smith’s pleasantries on the novelty of invasion ideas in
the brains of John Bull, and the difficulty of convincing him of the
possibilities of such a thing, were fully exemplified in the cabinet, as
well as in the people. The cabinet did little more than send for the
King, and the King did little more than send an incompetent offi