irs, or double couples. Four is an excellent number for
a travelling party, since in case of dispute the votes are either even,
or are three to one; four make up a _parti carré_ at dinner; four
balance a car well; four can split into two parties if need be; and four
coming together to an inn are sure to fare much better than one solitary
traveller.

Don’t go to Wales in July, the wettest and windiest month of the twelve
that the principality has the honour of knowing. May is a sweet month;
the colours of the woods and mountains gay and delicate, with little
rain, and generally as much sun as is wanted. In June, every thing is in
full perfection, and there are long days to boot, and you may then
remain out under a rock all night without damage. August corresponds to
June, but the days are shorter, and the company to be met with is
commonly more select. September is generally the equivalent of May, but
the colours are glowing with the rich tints of autumn; and though the
days are still shorter, yet the sights to be seen in them will make up
for this falling off. No person goes among the mountains in winter,
except those who cannot help it; yet this is not their least
advantageous period for being witnessed; and those who can brave frost
and snow, and the unchained force of all the winds of heaven, will be
repaid for the labours and discomforts of such a visit.

For those who are fond of the rod, the gun, and the chase, North Wales
is a land of choice. Whether they bob for whales in Bardsey Sound, or
hunt up the brooks and prattling streams of Merionethshire, or seek the
banks of many a glassy mountain pool, they will find enough to repay
them for their trouble. The shooter will find, from the grouse of
Montgomeryshire and Caernarvonshire to the partridges and the snipes of
Anglesey, abundant occupation for his gun. And the huntsman, though he
cannot gallop over Caddir-Idris, will find many a wily fox more than a
match for him and all his dogs, among the desolate cairns of the
mountain tops, or may find hares as big as sheep, and fleet enough to
try the mettle of the best horse he will dare to ride after them.

Whenever a tourist wishes to pass his summer months healthily and
agreeably, but is in doubt whither to go, let him start off for
Wales—North Wales—forthwith; and let him not return till wood and water,
and hill and dale have ceased to call forth his admiration.

Do not trust too implicitly to guidebooks, good traveller; take them and
consult them; but beware of their lying propensities. They have
inveigled many a loving subject of her Majesty’s into a scrape, and have
proved the dearest things he ever admitted into his pocket. Go with your
eyes open; go with a little common sense; go to be pleased: don’t go to
find fault. Make up your mind to rough it if need be; and don’t give
yourself the airs of my Lord Duke at every little wayside inn that your
dignity may be forced to put up at. You may then travel smoothly and
cheerfully through the Cimbric territory.

Take also this along with you. The Welsh are tremendously slow coaches.
Indolent, pig-headed, and careless, the _dolce far niente_ is their
motto throughout life; and, were they left to themselves, they would
positively retrograde through unwillingness to go a-head. It is of no
use hurrying them; a Welshman was never in a hurry in his life; time,
like water, is to him of little value; he has plenty and to spare of it,
and the waste of either commodity is not thought of. In Wales, they let
both run away often to little purpose; they have fewer “water
privileges” than any one could imagine; and they turn their privilege of
an _ad libitum_ supply of leisure to very poor account. So do not hurry
a Welshman; for you will not gain any of _his_ time, but will only lose
some of your own, by so doing.

The true way to enjoy Wales, and to understand the country, is to go and
fix your quarters at some quiet little country inn in a spot to your
taste; and remain there for a fortnight—a month—or as long as your
_gusto_ endures; walking up the whole country around, until you know
every crook and cranny of it, until it becomes in fact your “ancient
neighbourhood.” Many, or rather innumerable are the spots where you may
so fix yourself, and where your enjoyments, though simple, may be
extreme. If you are a bachelor, you can get clean beds, sheets of driven
snow, plenty of good milk, mountain mutton, and bread and butter _à
discrétion_; and what the deuce does a man want more? If he is young,
and in good health and spirits, and cannot fare upon this, let him put
up his traps and go to the antipodes. Or, if you are in the softer
predicament of having with you what, when you and I were young, you
know, used to be called _poetice_, the “girl of your heart”—but what now
in Polichinellic phraseology is termed the “wife of your bussum”—why,
even in this extremity, you may find room for two in any inn that you
venture to light upon. The lady must not be too fine in her notions, it
is true; she must be of that breed and mettle that will enable her to
face the mountain breeze, and wipe with hasty foot—as friend Gray
says,—the dews of the upland lawn; to meet the sun or the moon, or any
other natural phenomenon that is to be encountered on the hill-side. In
short, she must be the sort of girl that can mount a rough pony, or
scramble over a stone wall, and not care for her bonnet or her locks in
a pelting shower, but must be content to follow her liege lord, and love
him—and love his pursuits too, whether by the purling brook, or on the
misty height. Be sure of it, my friend, that with such a companion as
this, Welsh scenery—mountain scenery—nay, _any_ scenery, will have for
you a double—ay, a tenfold charm.

Men enjoy mountains: women enjoy waterfalls. There is no saying why it
is; but the fact is positive. Perhaps it may be that men can toil up the
rugged steep with greater ease, and therefore enjoy themselves the more
when they reach the top. Perhaps it is that there is something grand,
and bold, and rough, and dangerous, in the very nature of a mountain,
which the masculine mind is alone capable of fully understanding. In
waterfalls, there is all the beauty of form, and light and graceful
motion, and harmonious sound, and cooling freshness, and ever-changing
variety that woman always loves; and there are overshadowing trees, and
an escape from the noontide sun, and the hum of insect life, and
moss-grown stones, and soft grassy banks. Waterfalls and their adjuncts
have a kind of mystic influence about them that acts with all-persuasive
energy on the female mind: hearts like stones are worn down by their
action, and the swain has often been indebted to the Naiad for the
granting of his prayer.

Well; wherever you may be, whether single or double, any where in Wales,
the first thing to do is to make a bargain with your landlady, (Welsh
inns are always kept by women,) whereby you may be “boarded and lodged
and done for” at so much a day, or a week, or a month, or whatever time
it may please you to stay. This is the very best of all plans for
“taking your pleasure in your inn;” you know then the exact cost of your
stay—the precise damage done to your pocket; you dine comfortably,
without fearing that you are swallowing a five shilling piece in the
midst of each chop, and you can witness the last day of your sojourn
arrive without dread of that unpleasant winding up—the bill. You may get
boarded and lodged comfortably, nay luxuriously, as far as mountain
luxury goes, for a pound a-week: you may take your full swing of the
house for this; and your landlady will ask for a repetition of the
honour next year when you depart. So let no man say that living in Wales
is extravagant; it is only the _savoir vivre_ that is the scarce
commodity.

And if you would know where to go and find comfortable quarters of this
kind, and at this rate, then take our advice, gentle reader, and listen
to a few experiences. Go to Bala, and fish the lake there till not a
trout is left in it, and cut away at mine host’s mutton and beef, when
you come back from your day’s excursion, as though you had not eaten for
a week; and turn in by ten at night,—not later, mind; and be up again by
five, and out on the mountain side, or amid the woods by six, and home
again by seven to your morning fare. So shall you have health and
happiness, and freedom from ennui the livelong day.

Or go to Ffestiniog, up among its mountains, and ramble over to the
lakes below Snowdon, and visit the company at Beddgelert and
Tan-yBwlch—rather aristocratic places in their way, and made for
travellers with long purses. At Ffestiniog you are in the neighbourhood
of the best mountain scenery of Wales; and as for vales and streams, you
have such as you will never see elsewhere.

Or else go to Bettws-y-Coed near Llanrwst, the village of the confluence
of so many streams and valleys; that sweet woodland scene, that choice
land of waterfalls, and sunny glades, and wood-clad cliffs. Here you may
have variety of scenery in the greatest perfection; and here you may
enjoy the happiest admixture of the wild and the beautiful that the
principality can boast of. It is indeed a lovely spot; and, provided the
visitor has some intellectual resources and amusements within himself,
one that the tourist can never get tired of. It will bear visiting again
and again. _Decies repetita placebit._

But, dear sir, if you are bent upon making the grand tour, and if you
positively will see the whole of the country, then by all means start
from Chester, and make a continual round until you arrive at Shrewsbury;
so shall you see the whole length and breadth,—the bosom and the very
bowels of the land. You must go and see Conwy, Penmaen Mawr, and “the
Bridge,” as it is still emphatically called—Telford’s beautiful
exemplification of the catenary curve—and then go and hunt out Prince
Edward’s natal room in Caernarvon’s towers; and then clamber up Snowdon;
and then go down again to Capel Curig and Beddgelert, and so pass by
Pont Aberglaslyn to Tan-y-Bwlch, Ffestiniog and Dolgelly; and then mount
Cadair Idris; and then run up to Bala and Llangollen, and so stretch
away to the abode of the “proud Salopians.” And a very agreeable tour
you will have made, no doubt; but you will not know Wales for all that.
You have not been along the byeways, nor over the dreary heath, nor into
the river’s bed, nor under the sea-crag’s height: you will not have seen
a tithe of the wonders of the country. You must see all these great
places of course: but you ought to look after much more than this; you
must wander over the broad lands of the Vale of Clwyd, and look up all
its glorious little trout streams; you must go to the solitary heights
of Carnedd Llewelyn, and the Glidr above Nant Francon; and you must get
up to Llyn Idwal, and have nerve enough to climb over and under the
rocks of the Twll Du; and you must go to the very end of Llŷn, or else
you will never know what it is to lie down flat at the edge of the
Parwyd precipice, and look down six hundred feet sheer into the sea,
with not a blade of grass nor a stone between you and the deep blue
waters fresh from the Atlantic. And you must climb over the bleak
Merionethshire hills to seaward, and hunt up the lonely fishing pools
that abound in their recesses; and you must dive into the green wooded
valleys of Montgomeryshire, and learn whence the Severn draws all its
peat-brown waters. There is occupation enough in this for the longest
summer that ever yet shone on Wales; you may start on your pilgrimage
with the first green bud of spring, and end it with the sere and yellow
leaf of autumn: but it is only in such lengthened and lonely rambles as
these that the real beauties of the country are to be seen, and that the
full loveliness of nature—unsophisticated nature—is to be perceived.

Take your fishing rod with you, take your sketch book; explore the whole
country; bring it away with you both in mind and on paper: leave care
and trouble behind you; banish all reminiscences of town; go and be a
dweller with the birds and the dumb animals, with the leaves and the
stones, with the oak in the forest and the carn on the mountain, and
gain thereby a fund of health and satisfaction, that shall endure for
many a long day and year, nor be exhausted even then.

You are too old a traveller, we will suppose, to need many instructions
as to the general apparatus required; only mind and err rather on the
side of scantiness than otherwise; you can get all you really want at
the first town you come to. Who is the rash man that would risk a good
hat or a good coat on a Welsh mountain? Alas! he shall soon know the end
of his gear, and lament over the loss of his pence. The very idea of
going into cloud-land with anything on that you care about spoiling, or
rather that can by any possibility be spoiled! Is it not your privilege,
your aim, your pride, when you get among the mountains, to be able to go
right on end, through stream and bog, over rock and swamp, without