 for the not over generous remuneration, seemed
altogether at a loss to know for what he had been beaten; and I am happy
to say that the politeness of the peasant seemed to restore our military
friend to consciousness, and a fear that he had behaved like a brute. At
the next stage he provided himself with a Canadian cap, and on resuming
his seat overwhelmed us with apologies; so that we were compelled to
forgive the aberration, which was doubtless, as he said, attributable
solely to his loyal concern for the health of his Majesty, and to an
overflow of spirits at finding himself once more in the pale of the
British empire.

It was late in the afternoon when we arrived at Laprairie, that little
old Canadian town on the St Lawrence, where passengers take the steamer
to Montreal. Here was celebrating some kind of fête which had brought a
procession of nuns into the street, around whom were congregated groups
of smiling children in their holiday dresses. I entered a church, which
I found nearly deserted. A few of the poorer sort of persons were at
prayer, saying their _aves_ and _paters_ by the rosary—not, as is
sometimes supposed, through voluntary devotion, but in performance of
appointed penances, which they make haste to get through. Some funeral
ceremony seemed to be in preparation; for the church was dark, and a
_catafalque_ near the entrance gave me a startling sensation of awe. All
that Laprairie could show us was soon beheld; but our usual fortune had
attended us to the last, and we were again too late for the steamer. It
would not cross again till the morrow; yet there was the city of
Montreal distinctly visible before our eyes. From the quay we could
discern, down the river, the tin roof of the convent of Grayfriars,
glittering brightly in the descending sun. In fact, the whole city was
glittering, for every where its spires and roofs shone with a sheeting
of the Cornish material, which somehow or other, in this climate, seems
to resist oxidisation. In other respects, the scene was not remarkable,
except that there was the river—the broad, free, and magnificent St
Lawrence, with its rapids and its isles. Nuns’ Isle was above us, and
abreast of the city, with its fortress, was the green St Helen’s, _said
to be_ musical with the notes of birds, and fragrant with its flowers
and verdure.

We were regretting the premature departure of the steamer, when one of
our party came to announce that some Canadian boatmen were willing to
take us over in a batteau, if we would embark without delay. It was nine
miles, and the rapids were high; but we were informed that our ferrymen
were born to the oar, and might confidently be trusted with our lives.
We therefore lost no time in stowing ourselves, and part of our luggage,
into a mere shell of a boat, manned by half-a-dozen Canadians, who
pulled us into deep water with an air and a motion peculiarly their own.
Once fairly embarked, there was something not unpleasant in finding
ourselves upon the St Lawrence in a legitimate manner; for steamers were
yet a novelty in those waters, and were regarded by the watermen with
the same kind of contempt which an old English mail-coachman feels, in
the bottom of his soul, for stokers and railways. Finding ourselves, by
a lucky accident, thus agreeably launched, we naturally desired to hear
a genuine Canadian boat-song, and were not long in making the oarsmen
understand that an augmentation of their pay would be cheerfully
afforded, if they would but favour us with music. Every one has heard
the beautiful words of Tom Moore, inspired by a similar adventure. He
says of the familiar air to which they are set, that though critics may
think it trifling, it is for him rich with that charm which is given by
association to every little memorial of by-gone scenes and feelings. I
cannot say that the air of our _voyageurs_ was the same; yet I am quite
inclined to think that the words which he gives as the burden of the
Canadian boat-song which he heard so often, were those to which we were
treated. Barbarous, indeed, was their dialect if they attempted to give
us any thing so definite as the chanson,

                   “Dans mon chemin j’ai rencontré
                   Deux cavaliers, trés-bien montés;”

but there was a perpetually recurring _refrain_ which sounded like
_do—daw—donny-day_, and which I suppose to be a sort of French
_fol-de-rol_, but which I can easily conceive to have been, as our
English Anacreon reports it—

               “A l’ombre d’un bois je m’en vais jouer,
               A l’ombre d’un bois je m’en vais danser.”

Rude as was the verse and the music, however, I must own that, in its
place on that majestic river, as we were approaching the rapids whose
white caps were already leaping about our frail bark, with the
meditative light of sunset throwing a mellow radiance over all, there
was something that appealed very strongly to the imagination in that
simple Canadian air. I am not musical, and cannot recall it; yet even
now it will sometimes ring in my ears, when I go back in fancy to that
bright season of my life when I too was a _voyageur_; and I have often
been happy that accident thus gave me the pleasure of hearing what I
shall never hear again, and what travellers on the St Lawrence are every
year less and less likely to hear repeated. Indeed, I am almost able to
adopt every word which Moore has so poetically appended to his song. “I
remember,” says he, “when we entered at sunset upon one of those
beautiful lakes into which the St Lawrence so grandly and so
unexpectedly opens, I have heard this simple air with a pleasure which
the finest conceptions of the finest masters have never given me; and
now there is not a note of it which does not recall to my memory the dip
of our oars in the St Lawrence, the flight of our boat down the rapids,
and all the new and fanciful impressions to which my heart was alive
during the whole of this very interesting voyage.”

But our trip was not all poetry and song. When we were fairly upon those
bright-looking rapids, we found our little nutshell quite too heavily
loaded, and were forced to feel our evident danger with somewhat of
alarm. The billows whirled and tossed us about, till our Canadians
themselves became frightened, and foolishly throwing up their oars,
began to cross themselves and to call on the Virgin and all the saints.
The tutelar of the St Lawrence is said to inhabit hard by, at St
Anne’s,—but such was our want of confidence in his power to interfere,
that we met this outbreak of Romish devotion with a protest so vehement
that it would have surprised the celebrated diet of Spires. Certain it
is that, on resuming their oars, the fellows did much more for us than
their aspirations had accomplished, when unaided by efforts. We soon
began to enjoy the dancing of our batteau, which gradually became less
violent, and was rather inspiring. Still, as no one but a coward would
sport in safety with dangers which were once sufficient to appal, let me
confess that I believe I should be thankful that my journey and my
mortal life were not ended together in those dangerous waters. I trust
it was not without some inward gratitude to Him who numbers the very
hairs of our head, that we found ourselves again in smooth tides, and
were soon landed in safety on the quay at Montreal.




                      THE CONQUEST OF NAPLES.[16]


The stirring period of the middle ages, rich in examples of bold emprise
and events of romantic interest, includes no more striking and
remarkable episode than the invasion and conquest, by the brother of St
Louis, of the kingdom of the Two Sicilies. As an episode it has hitherto
been treated—introduced, and not unfrequently crushed into unmerited
insignificance, in works of general history. By both historian and poet
fragments have been brought into strong relief; as an independent whole,
no writer, until the present time, has ventured and chosen to attempt
its delineation. The virtues and misfortunes of the last legitimate
descendant of the imperial house of Stauffen, a house once so numerous
and powerful, have been wept over by the minstrels to whose fraternity
he belonged, vaunted by indignant chroniclers, and sung by the greatest
of Italy’s bards. The gallant and successful insurrection by which the
brightest gem was wrenched from the French usurper’s fire-new diadem,
and set in Arragon’s crown, has been repeatedly recorded and enlarged
upon, and not unfrequently mistold. But the integral treatment of the
conquest of Naples, in a work devoted to it alone, and worthy of the
weight and interest of the subject—the narrative of the ousting of the
German dynasty and establishment of a French one, including the
circumstances that led to the change, and apart from contemporary and
irrelevant history—were left for the elegant and capable pen of an
author honourably known for extensive learning and indefatigable
research. The puissant rule of Frederick the Hohenstauffe—the heroic
virtues and Homeric feats of Charles of Anjou—the precocious talents,
fatal errors, and untimely end of the luckless Conradin—have found a fit
chronicler in the accomplished Count of St Priest.

Besides acknowledged talents and great industry, this writer has brought
to his arduous task a familiar acquaintance—the result of long and
assiduous study—with the times and personages of whom he writes, a sound
judgment, and an honest desire of impartiality. In his quality of
Frenchman the latter was especially essential, to guard him against the
natural bias in favour of an illustrious and valiant countryman, that
might lead, almost unconsciously, to an undue exaltation of the virtues,
and extenuation of the crimes, of the hero of his narrative. Nor was
this the only instance in which he was liable to temptation. The
circumstances and causes of the massacre known as the Sicilian Vespers,
were handed down, in the first instance, by Italian writers, in the
adoption of whose views and assertions subsequent historians have
perhaps displayed too great servility. If we consider the vindictive and
treacherous instincts of the Sicilians, their fierce impatience of
foreign domination, and the slight account made of human life by the
natives of southern Europe generally, we cannot too hastily reject the
assertions and arguments by which M. de St Priest props his opinion,
that the vengeance was greater than the offence, the oppressed more
cruel than the oppressor. History affixes to an entire nation the stigma
of goading a conquered people to madness, by arrogance, injustice, and
excess. M. de St Priest takes up the defence, and, without claiming for
his client an honourable acquittal, strives, by the production of
extenuating circumstances, to induce the world to reconsider its severe
and sweeping verdict. He asks whether the evidence has been sufficiently
sifted, whether the facts have been properly understood and appreciated,
or even known. “I think,” he says, “they have not. The Sicilians
themselves acknowledge this. One of their most distinguished writers has
suspected falsehood, and sought the truth; but he has done so only in a
very exclusive, and consequently a very incomplete point of view. He has
aggravated the reproach that rests upon the memory of the French of the
thirteenth century. In my turn, I have resumed the debate with a
national feeling as strong, but less partial I hope, than that of most
of the Italian and German annalists, in whose footsteps our own
historians have trodden with undue complaisance. It is time to stand
aloof from these, and to reply to them.” It would be inverting the order
of our subject, here to dilate upon M. de St Priest’s views concerning
the massacre, to which we may hereafter recur. He scarcely makes out so
good a case for the French victims to Sicilian vengeance as he does for
the most prominent personage of his book, Charles of Anjou, whose
character he handles with masterly skill. He admits his crimes—sets off
with their acknowledgment; and yet so successfully does he palliate them
by the received ideas of the time, by the necessities and perplexities
of a most difficult position, that the reader forgets the faults in the
virtues of the hero, and receives an impression decidedly favourable to
the first French sovereign of Naples. “Had I proposed,”—we quote from
the preface—“to write a biography, and not a history, to paint a
portrait instead of a picture, I might have recoiled before my hero. The
blood of Conradin still cries out against his pitiless conqueror; but
the crime of the chief must not be imputed to the army. Aged warriors
were seen to weep and pray around the scaffold of a child. The end I
propose is not that of a retrospective vindication—an ungrateful, and
often a puerile task. Charles of Anjou was guilty. That fact admitted,
he still remains the greatest captain, the sole organising genius, and
one of the most illustrious princes of a period fertile in great kings.
Like his brother Louis IX., from whom, in other respects, he was only
too different, he valiantly served France. He carried the French name
into the most distant countries. By his political combinations, by the
alliances he secured for his family as much as by his victories, Charles
I., King of Sicily, seated his lineage upon the thrones of Greece,
Hungary, and Poland. Yet more—he saved the western world from another
Mahomedan invasion, less perceived, but not less imminent, than the
invasions of the eighth and seventeenth centuries. The bust of Charles
of Anjou merits a place between the statues of Charles Martel and John
Sobieski.”

This high eulogium, at the very commencement of the book, strikes us as
scarcely according with the promise of impartiality recorded upon the
following page. The meed of praise exceeds that we should be disposed to
allot to the conqueror of Naples. Still, upon investigation, it is