battle array. From the
height on which I stood, Montcalm beheld his allies, on a bright July
morning, their hatchets and tomahawks gleaming in the sun; their
standards and scalp-locks fluttering in the breeze; and their thousand
paddles hurrying them through the waves of that beautiful water: such a
sight as no eye will ever see again. To a nobleman fresh from the
gallantries of Versailles, it must have been a spectacle full of wild
and romantic interest; and the picture is altogether such a one as any
imagination may delight to reproduce. Yet, when we reflect that it is
even now but fourscore years and ten since such a scene was a terrible
reality, how striking the reflection that it has as absolutely vanished
from the earth, beyond the possibility of revival, as the display of
tournaments, and the more formidable pageants of the Crusades.

The following year an expedition against this fort was made by the
gallant Abercrombie, who approached it from Lake George, and endeavoured
to take it by storm. It is commonly said that Lord Howe fell in this
assault before the walls; but in fact he fell the day before, while
leading an advanced guard through the forest. Ticonderoga was garrisoned
by about four thousand men—French, Canadians, and Indians—and their
entrenchments were defended by almost impregnable outworks. The British
troops nevertheless made the attack with the greatest intrepidity, and
in spite of a murderous fire, forced their way to the walls, and even
scaled them, to be immediately cut down. But after repeated assaults,
and the loss of two thousand men, General Abercrombie was forced to
desist from the attempt; and the French kept the post for a time. It of
course became English in the following year, when the French power in
America was destroyed by the taking of Quebec.

I have already referred to its seizure by the eccentric Ethan Allen, on
the breaking out of the American war in 1775. This officer was a native
of Vermont, who had been an infidel preacher, and was notorious as the
editor of the first deistical publication that ever issued from the
American press. The revolution was hardly begun, when the province of
Connecticut gave him a commission to capture Ticonderoga. With about
three hundred of his hardy “Green-mountain-boys,” he was hastening to
the spot, when he fell in with Arnold, bearing a similar commission from
Massachusetts. After some dispute as to the command, Allen was made
leader, and Arnold his assistant. They arrived by night on the Vermont
shore, opposite the fort. There they found a lad who had been accustomed
to visit the fort every day with provisions and pedlar’s wares, and
crossing by his directions, without noise, they were shown a secret and
covered entrance into the fort itself. Climbing up through this passage,
Allen led his men within the walls, and drew them up in the area of the
fortress, having silenced and disarmed the only sentry who guarded the
entrance. The commander of the post, who hardly knew there was war, was
actually startled from his sleep, by Allen’s demand for its surrender.
The drowsy officer inquired—“By what authority?” And was answered by
Allen, half in banter and half in bombastic earnest,—“In the name of the
Great Jehovah, and of the Continental Congress!” To one in his straits,
with a sword at his naked breast, such a reply, however unintelligible,
was sufficiently overpowering, and the post was surrendered without
resistance. Its reduction in 1777, by Burgoyne, has been already
described; but Ticonderoga is for ever endeared to Americans from the
fact, that the flag of their independence was so early given to the
breeze from its summit.

A guide, who called himself Enoch Gold, led me over the ruins. He
pretended to have been with St Clair, and to have seen Burgoyne and his
men on Mount Defiance. He showed us the way through which Allen gained
his entrance, and took us down into the vaults and magazines. A
subterranean apartment was shown as a kitchen, and the old fellow
declared he had eaten bread hot out of its ovens. We gave the
_soi-disant_ veteran the liberal rewards of a hero; but I suspect we
were paying him for his imagination, rather than for his hardships.

The shadows of the fortress were beginning to lengthen on the lake
before we returned to our bark. The mountains of Vermont, which are
mostly well wooded, looked brightly green in the broad sunshine, and
tempted us to wish we had time for an excursion to their heights. It was
afterwards my happiness to go into Vermont, on a visit to Lake Dunmore,
which lies among its mountains, and supplies delicious fish. I found it
a truly Arcadian region, abounding with streams and pasturages, and rich
in flocks and herds. It breeds a rugged race of men, with some
characteristics decidedly Swiss. It is said, indeed, that a Switzer, who
had come to settle in America, preferred these diminutive Alps, with
their lakes and mountaineer population, to any other part of the
country; and, fixing his dwelling accordingly, soon ceased to be
home-sick, and sigh at the _ranz des vaches_.

Crown Point, the twin sister of Ticonderoga, is only ten miles beyond;
but we did not reach it as soon as we had expected, for the wind had
changed, and we were obliged to tack. Every now and then, the man at the
helm, which was our gallant captain himself, would cry out,—“Heads!” and
the boom would come sweeping across the deck, with woe to the head that
wore a hat, or did not bow soon enough to save it. Several times I
expected to see our friend Freke carried overboard bodily, and engulfed
like another Corlaer; for so profoundly was he engaged with his cigar,
as he sat, or rather squatted, on the hatches, that the captain’s
monotonous warning failed to alarm him till the whole company had echoed
“Heads!” and, with other demonstrations of affectionate solicitude,
forced him to fall on all-fours.

At Crown Point the lake greatly improves. The water appears much
clearer, and the width of the lake is nearly if not quite fourfolded. It
continues to expand till it becomes ten or twelve miles in breadth, and
islands begin to be numerous. To the northward the higher peaks of the
Green Mountains stretch away with magnificent outlines; and on the west,
a bleak and craggy range of hills, which are said to harbour even yet
the wolf and the bear, approach, and then recede from the shore. Here,
as early as 1731, the French built Fort Frederick, as the first move
towards the seizure and claim of the whole surrounding territory; and
from this point they made their bloody and atrocious incursions into New
England, and towards the Mohawk, or dismissed their hireling savages to
do it for them. The recesses of Fort Frederick are believed to have
rivalled the dungeons of the Inquisition in scenes of misery and crime.
In its gloomy cells were plotted the inhuman massacres which drenched
the American settlements in blood. There, it is said, the Indian
butchers received their commissions to burn, tomahawk, and scalp; and
there, in the presence of Jesuit fathers, or at least with their
connivance, was the gleaming gold counted down to the savages in return
for their infernal trophies of success; the silvery locks of the aged
colonist, the clotted tresses of women, and the crimsoned ringlets of
the child. In 1759 this detestable hold of grasping and remorseless
tyranny was blown up, and abandoned by the French to General Amherst.
Soon after, the British Government began to erect a fortification in the
vicinity of the ruins, and a noble work it was; though it proved of no
use at all, after the enormous sum of two millions sterling had been
expended on its walls of granite, and ditches blasted in the solid rock.
The exploits of Arnold and Sir Guy Carleton in this vicinity have been
already described. Since the close of the war of the Revolution, the
costly works at Crown Point have been suffered to fall into decay; and
they are now piles of ruin, covered with weeds, among which the red
berries of the sumach are conspicuously beautiful in their time.

Though “Captain Pusher” made a landing at this point to procure a little
milk for our tea, we did not go ashore, and were soon on our way once
more with a freer prospect, and perhaps with somewhat expanded spirits.
The setting sun, in the clear climate of America, is in fair weather
almost always beautiful; and my recollections of the rosy and purple
tints with which it adorned the feathery flakes of cloud that floated
around the peaks of the Green Mountains, are to this day almost as
bright in memory as when they first made my heart leap up to behold them
in the soft summer sky of Vermont. As the lake grew wider and the
darkness deeper, there was of course less and less to be seen; and the
noble scenery at Burlington, where the width of the lake is greatest,
and the shores assume a bolder and higher character of beauty, was to
our great regret unavoidably passed in the night. Still, there is
something in starlight upon the waters, in new and romantic regions,
which peculiarly inspires me. The same constellations which one has long
been accustomed to view in familiar scenes and associations, come out
like old friends in the heavens of strange and untried lands; shining
witnesses to the brotherhood of differing nations, and to the impartial
benevolence and unsleeping love of God. But I have no reason to regret
that the only night I ever passed on Lake Champlain was mostly spent in
watching; for long before I was tired of gazing at Orion and the
Pleiads, I was rewarded by the sight of one of the most splendid auroras
that I ever beheld. In a moment, the whole northern heaven was
illuminated with columnar light; and the zenith seemed to rain it down,
so to speak—while the surface of the lake reflecting it, gave us, to our
own eyes, the appearance of sailing in some bright fluid, midway between
a vault and an abyss of fire. This display of glory continued to flash
and quiver above us for several hours. There were, in quick succession,
sheets and spires and pencils of variegated light, rolling and
tremulous, wavy and flame-like, blazoning heaven’s azure with something
like heraldic broidery and colours. Towards morning, the intense cold
and heavy mountain dews drove me for a season to my berth; but I was on
deck again in time to see the moon make her heliacal rising over the
eastern peaks, in the wan paleness of her last quarter. The approach of
day was attended with a fog; but it soon thinned off, and we made
Plattsburgh in good time. Here we parted with our vessel, and her worthy
commander; and though we neither gave him a piece of plate nor voted him
an accomplished gentleman, we left him with such wishes as, if they have
been fulfilled, have long since removed him from the helm of his sloop,
and the waters of Lake Champlain, to a snug little cot at Burlington,
and the company of any number of rosy little Green-Mountain boys and
their interesting mother.

Plattsburgh is situated on the western bank of the lake, just where the
crescent shore of a bold peninsula begins to curve round a broad
semicircular bay, several miles in circumference, and of liberal depth.
Here the American squadron, under Commodore Macdonough, was anchored on
the 11th of September 1814, in order to assist the land forces under
General Macomb, in repelling an expected attack from the British troops
under Sir George Prevost. The English flotilla had been ordered up from
the Isle-aux-Noix to engage Macdonough, and divert his fire from the