their wives, on a crusade,—was sick to death at the
island of Cyprus, but recovered, and performed prodigies of valour in
fight with the Saracen. It seemed as if the scent of battle sufficed to
restore him his full vigour; and he displayed a furious impetuosity and
reckless daring that almost surpass belief. On arriving off Damietta,
and at sight of the Saracen army waiting on the shore, he and St Louis
sprang from their galley, and waded to land, with the water to their
waists. Surrounded by the enemy, Charles raised a wall of corpses around
him, until his knights came up to the rescue. Heading them, he charged
the infidel host, ordering to strike at the horses’ breasts. The noble
Arab chargers fell by hundreds; the Saracens fled; Louis and Charles
pursued; Damietta was the prize of the Christians. “The adventurous
prince feared the elements as little as he did man. One day the Saracens
threw Greek fire upon the crusaders’ tents. Struck with surprise at
sight of this mysterious enemy, the Christians were so terrified that
they dared not attempt to extinguish the flames. ‘I will go,’ cried the
Count of Anjou. They tried to retain him by force, but he broke from
them like a madman, and succeeded in his design. At another time, St
Louis, from the top of a hill, saw him engaged single-handed with a
whole troop of Saracens, who hurled at him darts with flaming flags,
which stuck into and burnt his horse’s crupper. Thus did Charles display
the first symptoms of a will incapable of receding even before
impossibilities,—a dangerous application of a great virtue; but then,
these feats of the Count of Anjou delighted every body. Other exploits
followed. Like a Christian Horatius, Charles one day stopped the whole
Mussulman army upon a wooden bridge.” This great bravery was accompanied
by pride, egotism, and hardness of heart, and these qualities caused
bickerings between him and St Louis. Nevertheless, the brothers were
fondly attached to each other; and when Charles returned to Provence he
displayed a depth of emotion on parting from his king that surprised the
army, which did not give him credit for so much fraternal affection.
There was great contrast of character between him and his royal brother.
“They had in common,” says M. de St Priest, “military courage, chastity,
probity, and respect to their plighted word.... St Louis was a
Frenchman, Charles of Anjou a Spaniard. St Louis had that communicative
disposition, that taste for social enjoyment, that necessity of
expansion and gentle gaiety, generally attributed to our nation. He was
evidently the man born beside the waters of Loire or Seine. Charles, on
the other hand, seemed to have received life upon the rugged rocks of
Toledo, or in the naked and melancholy plains of Valladolid. He was
proud and gloomy; no smile ever curved his lips. Uncommunicative, he
confided his designs to no one. Although hasty, violent, and passionate,
he strove to conceal his emotions. He slept little, spoke less; never
forgot a service or an injury. His indulgence for his partisans and
servants was unbounded: if he was passionately fond of gold, it was
especially that he might shower it upon them. Charles and Louis were a
contrast even in form and colour of face. Louis was fair and ruddy;
Charles had black hair, an olive skin, nervous limbs, and a prominent
nose. Goodness was the characteristic of the king, severity of the
count. Both of imposing aspect,—one as a father, the other as a
master—Louis inspired respect and love, Charles respect and terror. By
the admission of all his contemporaries, nothing could be more majestic
than the look, gait, and stature of the Count of Anjou. In an assemblage
of princes he eclipsed them all. A poet who knew him well, and who calls
him the most _seignorial_ of men, shows him to us at the court of France
in the midst of his brothers, and characterises him by this energetic
line—

         ‘Tous furent filz de roy, mais Charles le fut mieux.’”

Such was the man who, on the 15th May 1265, embarked at Marseilles for
Rome, with a thousand chosen knights upon thirty galleys, leaving the
main body of his army at Lyons to cross the Alps with the Countess
Beatrix, under the nominal command of the young Robert de Bethune
Dampierre, heir to the county of Flanders, and the real guidance of
Gilles de Traisignies, constable of France. At the moment of his
departure, timid counsellors magnified the peril of the enterprise, and
the superiority of the hostile fleet that watched to intercept him; but
nothing could shake the determination of the Count of Anjou. “Good
conduct,” he said, as he put foot on his galley’s deck, “overcomes ill
fortune. I promised the Pope to be at Rome before Pentecost, and I will
keep my word.” If fortune had not favoured him, however, it is doubtful
if he would have succeeded in running the gauntlet through the sixty
Sicilian galleys, manned with the practised mariners of Pisa, Naples,
and Amalfi, that waited to pounce, like hawk on sparrow, upon his feeble
armament. Independently of this formidable squadron, the entrance of the
port of Ostia was encumbered, by Mainfroy’s order, with beams and huge
stones, against which the French ships were expected inevitably to
shatter themselves. Altogether, the marine preparations were so
formidable, they were proclaimed with such ostentation, and Mainfroy
appeared so convinced of their efficacy, that at Rome the partisans of
Charles and the Pope lost courage. The decisive moment arrived, and no
fleet appeared; when suddenly a rumour spread that Charles was
shipwrecked and drowned. The Ghibellines, or imperialists, hailed the
report with delight, the Guelfs with terror. Friends and enemies alike
believed the fatal intelligence, when at break of day, on the eve of
Pentecost, a boat, containing ten men, entered the Tiber. Amongst these
ten men was Charles of Anjou. He owed his safety to his peril;
deliverance had grown out of impending destruction. A violent storm had
had a double result: Mainfroy’s fleet, which for some days past had
blockaded the Tiber, was compelled to put to sea, and the thirty
Provençal galleys were dispersed in view of Pisa. Charles was wrecked on
the coast of Tuscany; to escape capture by one of Mainfroy’s
lieutenants, he threw himself into a skiff, and the wind guided him into
the Tiber, which he entered unperceived by the Sicilian admiral. Such
was the fortunate chance that served him. Men believed him at the bottom
of the sea, and at that moment he landed in Italy.

Mainfroy prepared for defence, affecting boundless confidence in the
result of the approaching strife, but in reality uneasy at the approach
of his formidable foe. His hatred found vent in sarcasm and abusive
words. “Although the name of the terrible Charles of Anjou did not
encourage childish diminutives, Mainfroy and his flatterers never spoke
of him otherwise than as Carlotto” (Charley.) This was not very
dignified or in good taste. But Charles was at no loss for a retort.
When his wife had joined him, at the head of thirty thousand men, and
the royal pair had been crowned in the Church of the Lateran, in sight
and amidst the acclamations of an immense multitude, King and Queen of
Sicily, he marched upon Naples. At the frontier, Mainfroy, after a vain
attempt to intimidate the Pope, endeavoured to delay his progress by
negotiation. “Tell the Sultan of Lucera,” replied Charles to the Swabian
envoys, “that between us there can be neither peace nor truce; that soon
he shall transport me to paradise or I will send him to hell.” And
having thus branded his opponent as an infidel, and his opponent’s cause
as unjust, he resolutely entered the Neapolitan states. The first
barrier to his progress, the fortified bridge of Ceprano, was opened to
him by Riccardo d’Aquino, Count of Caserte, out of revenge for the
alleged seduction or violation of his wife by Mainfroy. The count was
about to defend the post, when news of his dishonour reached him. He
vowed a terrible revenge; but, scrupulous even in his anger, he sent to
consult the casuists of the French camp, whether a vassal had the right
to punish the liege lord who had outraged him in his honour. The
casuists made an affirmative reply, and Caserte gave free passage to
Charles of Anjou. History is more positive of the count’s treason than
of the outrage said to have induced it. The occupation of the bridge was
but a small step towards the conquest of the Two Sicilies. Charles’s
path was beset with obstacles, augmented by the difficulty of
transporting his warlike engines, and by fierce dissensions in his army.
These alone were sufficient to ruin the enterprise; but the valour and
military science of the French prince supplied all deficiencies. His
operations were sometimes, however, a little impeded from pious
scruples; as, for instance, when he put off the assault of a town for
two days, in order not to fight on Ash Wednesday. Nevertheless his
progress was rapid and triumphant, and soon the silver fleur-de-lis of
France, and the crimson ones of the Guelfs, floated above the walls or
over the ruins of Mainfroy’s strongest forts. All the Saracens who fell
into Charles’s hands were immediately put to the sword. At last, in the
valley of Santa Maria de Grandella, and at four miles from the town of
Benevento, the French army—to which were now united the levies of many
disaffected Neapolitan nobles—came in sight of Mainfroy’s host, drawn up
in order of battle. The strength of the two armies is variously stated,
but it appears certain that the numerical advantage was considerably on
the side of Charles. Before engaging, each leader made a speech to his
troops. That of Charles reminds us of Cromwell’s well-known exhortation
to his men, to trust in God and keep their powder dry. “Have confidence
in God,” said the valiant and pious Frenchman, “but neglect not human
means; and be attentive, when battle begins, to what I now tell you:
strike at the horses rather than at the men, not with edge, but with
point; so that, falling with his horse and being unable to rise quickly,
on account of the weight of his armour, the cavalier may immediately
have his throat cut by the _ribauds_. Let each of you be always
accompanied by one of those varlets, and even by two. Forget not that,
and march!” The manœuvre prescribed by Charles of Anjou, and which he
had already essayed in Palestine, was forbidden by chivalrous etiquette,
which stigmatised as disloyal the act of striking at the horses’ heads.
But Charles was not at a tournament. His aim was victory, and his
injunction was well received by his knights, whom his words excited,
says a chronicler, _as the huntsman excites the dogs_. There was neither
blame nor murmur. Nevertheless his chevaliers were the flower of
nobility; but they did not hold themselves engaged in a regular war;
they looked upon the expedition as a crusade against infidels. The
bishop of Auxerre gave a final benediction; the trumpets sounded, and
the signal of battle echoed through both camps.

Neither army had left its ground when the clamour of many thousand
voices was heard; and, like a whirlwind, the Saracen archers from Lucera
poured upon the field. Crossing the little river Calora, they fell upon
the French infantry with a discharge of arrows. The French, with loud
cries of “Down with the Saracens! Down with the swine!” rushed furiously
to meet them. The medley was terrible, and at first victory favoured the
turban. Charles’s troops broke and fled, when Ruggiero San Severino
rallied them, waving, by way of banner, a bloody shirt, stripped from a
soldier’s corpse. Philip de Montfort brought up the reserve, and threw
himself upon the Saracens, whom he cut to pieces with cries of
“Montfort, chevaliers!” “Swabia, chevaliers!” replied Gualvano Lancia,
who, without waiting orders from Mainfroy, hurried forward a thousand
men of the best German troops. He fell upon the French, who were weary
with striking, and made a great slaughter of them. Charles of Anjou, who
in his part of the field performed, as usual, prodigies of valour, now
left the wing he commanded and attacked Gualvano Lancia. The Germans and
Saracens were cut to pieces and dispersed; but the Italian battalions,
commanded by nobles of the country, had not yet shared the combat.
Mainfroy had kept them as a reserve, and now called upon them to follow
him. Instead of so doing, they turned their backs and fled. At the same
moment a silver eagle, surmounting Mainfroy’s helm, fell and broke in
pieces. At this evil omen, the son of the Hohenstauffe felt himself
lost. He turned towards the faithful few who still stood by him, and
said in the words of the Catholic Church: _Hoc est signum Dei_. Then,
followed by Tibaldo Annibaldi, he plunged into the thickest of the
hostile squadrons, and was seen no more alive. For three days nothing
was heard of him, and Charles of Anjou thought he had escaped, when a
soldier led his war-horse past the window of Gualvano Lancia and two
other Ghibelline prisoners. On recognising the steed, the captives burst
into tears, and implored the soldier, a Picard, to tell them the fate of
its rider, whether prisoner, slain, or fugitive. “The Picard, having
learned who the prisoners were, replied thus: ‘I will tell you the
truth; during the fight, the man who mounted this horse came up,
uttering terrible cries. He rushed into the mêlée, followed by another
cavalier much less than himself, and fell upon us with such courage
that, had he been supported by others as brave, he would have beaten us
or given us much to do. I showed front to this knight and wounded his
charger in the head with a lance-thrust; the horse, feeling itself
wounded, threw its rider; then the _ribauds_ despoiled him of his arms
and made an end of him. As his scarf was very beautiful, I took it, as
well as his horse; and here they both are.’ Such was the noble end of
Manfred, or Machtfried, of Stauffen, whom the French were wont to call
Mainfroy of Sicily.” With great difficulty, the royal corpse was found,
amidst heaps of slain, and the French chevaliers entreated Charles to
allow it honourable burial. “Willingly,” replied Charles, “were he not
excommunicated.” The new King of Sicily could not reasonably be expected
to grant ecclesiastical interment to the man, whom he had fought and
supplanted on the sole ground of his being out of the pale of the
church. So a trench was dug at the foot of the bridge over the Calora,
the body was laid in it, the army filed by, and each soldier, as he
passed, threw a stone upon the unconsecrated grave. As great warriors